ADVENTURE CREATION
After developing one or more worlds, a GM ought to
have a fairly substantial list of Friends, Enemies, Places,
Complications, and Things appropriate to a given planet. An experienced GM may well be able to assemble
an interesting adventure out of these pieces, but even
the most practiced designer might be hard-pressed to
come up with enough interesting setups to fill out an
entire sector.
The method that follows is by no means the best
or only way to devise an adventure, but it’s a procedure
that will do the job for a working GM. This method
work best if you’ve already generated a world using
the tools in the Sector Creation chapter, but the basic
outlines can function even without such support.

Identify Your Needs

The first step in creating an adventure is identifying
what, precisely, you need the adventure to do. If you’ve
been following the recommended pattern for running
your campaign, the last session ended with you asking
the players what goal they wanted to pursue next time.
If this is for the first adventure to kick off a campaign,
you might need something that introduces the players
to the setting and gives them a short adventure to get
them working together smoothly. If you’re creating
backup content that you can deploy rapidly when the
players catch you off guard, then that might be a third
sort of purpose behind your work. Whatever it is, you
need to keep this basic goal in mind as you create the
adventure content. Adventures are created to be playable content at the table, so it needs to work for you.
Often, players are somewhat equivocal when they
tell you what sort of effort they plan to make for the
next session. Sometimes their intentions will be clear
and direct, such as pursuing a nemesis who got away
from them last time with a cargo hold full of alien artifacts. Other times, it will be something more nebulous,
like “Find a good deal on cargo for our ship” or “Explore
some of the alien ruins you mentioned were on this
world”, or “Do something really unkind to the planetary
duke who shot down our starship”.
When things are clear, you’ll have an easy time
creating an adventure. If they’re chasing the nemesis,
you know you need to create an adventure revolving
around them pursuing this evildoer and encountering
plausible challenges on the way. If the guidance you’ve
been given is less precise, more of the details are up to
you. You might create an adventure about a “bargain”
cargo deal that threatens to go very bad, or draw up an
alien ruin for them to explore, or introduce a plucky
band of anti-ducal rebels for the PCs to encounter,
along with the problems those rebels have. So long as
what you’re making is logically connected to what they
want from you, you’ll be able to deliver a fine time at
the table.

Sometimes, however, the players ask for something you know is going to be impossible, or something that you know will be rapidly reconsidered by
the group. Maybe the nemesis has fled into the bowels
of an ultra-high-security orbital citadel, or you know
that the duke is actually dying of biopsionic cancer and
will be dead in a few more days. If the information is
available to the PCs, you can point this out to them
and let them reconsider their goals. They might give
up on pursuing the nemesis, for example, or change
their goal to that of finding some way to penetrate the
defenses around the orbital station. It’s important not
to completely shut down impractical plans, but instead
suggest alternate routes that might turn “impossible”
into merely “very difficult”.
Be willing to follow the players’ lead on alternate
routes. If there’s not a compelling reason to shoot down
an idea or assumption about the world, run with it. If
they ask if there are rebels or traitors or spy networks
they might be able to contact to get the information
they need to crack the defenses, then tell them yes. If
the players are going to be kind enough to map out
your adventure creation needs for you, let them do the
work unless there’s a very good reason otherwise.
Other times, however, the players don’t have the
information they’d need to realize that their intentions
are impractical. You know they’re going to get ten minutes into the next session before they realize that what
they planned to do is totally impossible. You can’t write
them an adventure that gives them a chance of succeeding at the goal, not without violating common sense or
already-established game world facts, so what do you
do in such situations? There are two general ways to
handle this: anticipate their next course of action, or
prepare filler content.
There are times when you can tell that the players
are going to hit the obstacle and immediately look for
a way around it. Maybe they discover the nemesis has
fled to the orbital at the start of the next adventure,
but a convenient NPC suggests that there’s a way to
get the passcodes onto the station if the PCs are able
to contact a certain information broker. You write the
adventure to help you handle the PCs’ attempts to find
and convince the broker to help them, because you’re
confident that the group isn’t going to just shrug and
let the nemesis go.
On other occasions, however, you don’t have that
confidence. You really aren’t sure what the PCs will decide to do when they see their initial goal is impractical.
In this case, you write some filler content, designed to
give the players something fun to do for the session
while they figure out their next plan. This sort of filler
content can often be written far in advance of its actual
need, and over the course of a long campaign it’s likely
you’ll end up with several sessions worth of this prep

174• ADVENTURE CREATION
work kept ready in your GM folder, available for deployment whenever the PCs start doing things you’re
not prepared to handle yet. This section will include
some specific advice on how to build this kind of filler
content and how to insert it into play.
In the end, the goal at this stage is to have a clear
idea of what sort of content you need to have prepped
for the next session. Once you know what kind of material you need to make, you can go on to the next stage.

Choose Ingredients

The next step in creating the adventure is to look back
at your sector information and the tags and elements
you’ve rolled up for the planet the PCs are on. You’ve
already created some NPCs, complications, and places
to work with, so now’s your chance to take advantage
of your preparations. If the PCs are somewhere that
hasn’t had that work done already, take a moment to
fabricate an appropriate Friend, Enemy, Complication,
Thing, and Place suitable for the setting. You’ll use these
ingredients to create the adventure in the next step.
While you can pull the ingredients directly from
your sector file, you can also take a moment to customize them to the situation. Maybe there’s a particular
NPC you know is going to show up next time, given
the party’s ambitions, or there’s a specific macguffin
that’s in circulation right now. You can adjust these
ingredients to fit the specific circumstances and help
smooth transitions between adventures. The same people can keep showing up when it’s logical that they’d
be involved, and the other elements can persist to help
give a sense of continuity to events.
It’s also useful to pull in regular callbacks from
prior adventures. The things that PCs do have consequences, and sometimes those consequences persist for
quite some time. Try to put at least one callback to prior
events or people into each adventure, even if it’s just a
cameo from an NPC, or a newsflash giving up-to-date
reporting on some situation the PCs were involved in.
The more that the PCs feel like they’re really making
a difference in the campaign world, the more engaged
they’re going to be with the setting.
Try to make sure that the ingredients you use are
logical and coherent elements of your campaign setting.
Pulling antagonists or macguffins from the starry void
can be convenient, but an ingredient that just comes
out of nowhere, with no foreshadowing or visible connection to the rest of the campaign, is an ingredient
that some groups might find jarring and difficult to
interact with. In the absence of some visible connection to the rest of the campaign, it’s hard for a party
to get their hands around an ingredient and deduce
intelligent, rational ways to interact with it. A planetary
tyrant they’ve known about for a few sessions is much
easier to deal with than an alien overlord fresh out of
drillspace, because the tyrant is part of a setting and
context they’ve had a chance to understand.

Assemble the Outline

With the adventure ingredients in hand, it’s time to put
together the basic outline of the adventure. An outline
isn’t meant to fill in every detail and supply every fact
you need to run the adventure, but merely to give you
a basic idea of the adventure’s premise and point out
the kind of information you’ll need to prepare for play.
If you’re pressed for time and don’t feel like assembling your own outline, flip forward in this section
to a list of one hundred plot seeds. Take your Friends,
Enemies, Complications, and other world elements and
slot them into a seed that looks appropriate to your
needs. You now have your outline and can skip to the
next step in creating the adventure.
If you’d rather spend more time developing the
outline, you’ll want to pick three basic elements to
make up its essential frame. Not every adventure involves all three elements, but usually you’ll need representative examples of each. You’ll need a Problem to
drive the adventure, a Person to serve as an antagonist
or point of entry to the Problem, and you’ll need a Place
to set the events as they play out.
Your Problem is the core of your adventure, and
is an unstable or untenable situation that the PCs can
meaningfully affect. The players aren’t going to care
about problems so big or so intractable that their actions won’t have any consequential effect. They’re
going to be engaged with problems small enough, or
specific enough, that they feel that their choices can
really change the outcome.
Some Problems are self-attractive to the players. If
the party wants to explore an alien ruin on this world,
then simply putting an unexplored alien art museum
where they can get at it will be enticement enough. The
Problem is that the PCs want what’s inside the museum, but there are some dangers or difficulties that are
preventing them from plundering its age-old secrets.
Your job in that case will be to make the overcoming of
those difficulties interesting enough to satisfy the players. Whenever you have a situation where the players
want X, your Problem can simply consist of placing X
and then making it plausibly difficult to get to.
Other times, this isn’t going to be enough. Perhaps,
the planet’s savage water barons are locked in a bloody
struggle over control of the ancient Mandate-era hydroforming installation, control of which will leave
one of them the undisputed master of the arid world.
Certainly, the services of a small band of recklessly courageous adventurers could be vital in penetrating the
installation’s automatic defenses, but why should the
players care which tattooed savage gets to be master?
The Person is your way of connecting the players
with the Problem, when the Problem is not one that
naturally attracts their interest. The Person provides
the human connection between the party and the situation, either through being a sympathetic figure who
appeals to the group’s desire to help, or through being
a dangerous antagonist who forces a response.

ADVENTURE CREATION •175
Of course, an adventure can involve more than
one important NPC, and the players might end up with
multiple reasons to engage with the Problem. But by
focusing on at least one important Person, you make
sure that the players have a real reason to care about
the Problem and provide yourself with a contact point
through which to pass on information about the situation. Even an antagonist can serve as a useful chance
to dump setting info on the players and clue them in
to adventure opportunities. A blood-distilling water
baron who wipes out a sand village that helped the
party in an earlier adventure informs the players not
only that the water barons exist on the world, but that
this particular vampire warlord is on his way to seize
the hydroforming station.
At this stage, pick one Person to be the connection between the Problem and getting the PCs directly
involved. Give them a name and a sentence or so describing how they’re going to pull the PCs in, but don’t
worry about fleshing them out further at this point.
You might add additional people to the mix if you know
there are certain other NPCs you want to involve in the
situation, but you can delay this to the next step.
Finally, you need to choose a Place where this adventure is going to take place. Some sessions will occur
in multiple Places, with the heroes gallivanting around
the planet or solar system to deal with the Problem in
multiple locations, but every adventure needs at least
one Place to contain the action.
Sometimes the Place itself is the focus of the action. If the PCs are looting an alien art museum, then
the museum itself is going to be the major element of
importance in the adventure. You’re going to have to
make it a sufficiently interesting, complex, and engaging location to support a full session’s adventure.
Other times, the Place is just a backdrop to the action. A Problem involving tribal warfare in the steaming xeno-jungles of some gas giant moon might have
the terrain be a factor in things, but the jungle itself
is not expected to be interesting enough to keep the
players occupied with no further action. In these situations, the Place informs and shapes the Problem and
gives color and flavor to events, but you don’t have to
build it out into playable content by itself.
For now, define the Place that contains the Problem and make sure they’re connected in some way.
Even if the Place is just giving flavor and style cues to
the Problem, it should be clear to the players that whatever is going on here is a thing that is going on in this
particular Place. Make the tribal warfare the kind that
would occur in a jungle, with swift canoes fashioned of
giant beetle shells and ambushes that take advantage of
the perils of the alien jungle. The more the Place affects
what is happening, the more it matters to the game.
Once you’ve chosen a Problem to deal with, a
Person to connect the party with the situation, and a
Place where all of this is going to unfold, you’re ready
to move on to the next step in creating your adventure.

Fleshing It Out

You know the basic outline of the adventure, so this
stage is where you add the extra information you need
to actually play it out at the table. Some GMs need very
little of this, and can improvise an evening’s play out
of nothing more than an outline and a few sketched
notes. Most GMs require a little more preparation to
be comfortable with running an adventure. As you go
through this process, let your own comfort level be
your guide on how detailed and elaborate your preparation work should be, but make sure to cover the basic,
critical parts of the adventure first before you spend
time detailing contingencies and what-ifs.
To start the process, ask yourself the following
questions to determine what sort of preparation work
you need to do.
What maps do I need? If you expect the PCs to
assault a location, you’re going to need a map good
enough to support that. You can pull something close
off the web, scribble in any tweaks needed for your adventure, and use it accordingly. Maybe the abandoned
missile silo plans you’ve downloaded are actually being
used as a hidey-hole for a rebel leader, but all it takes
is a few coats of GM paint and the players won’t know
the difference.
The more carefully and intently the PCs are going
to be interacting with a site, the more you’re going to
need a map for it. A tense political meeting that takes
place on some orbital resort station might not need a
map at all if the focus is around the politics of it. If you
know a terrorist group is going to bomb the talks and
try to assassinate the diplomats, however, then you’re
going to need enough of a map to support the PCs’ inevitable attempts to foil or escape the bloodshed.
What places do I need to make interesting? This is
a special case that you’ll run into when the adventure
involves exploring a site. A simple diagram of a location is all you need to run a firefight there, but when
the thrust of the adventure involves plumbing the unknown mysteries of a site, there better be some halfway-decent mysteries there to plumb. There should be
perilous dangers, satisfying rewards, and interesting
gubbins to manipulate in the place, elements informed
by the map’s nature and origins. If the PCs are exploring a Chittik hive-station, they ought to be finding
things that make sense in the context of a man-eating
alien beetle home, while an abandoned Mandate control center should be full of the dusty relics of that lost
star-spanning human empire.
The art of creating an interesting site to explore is
worth a book in itself, but the tools later in this chapter
can help give you some ideas. Another useful source of
inspiration exists in countless old-school fantasy adventure modules; just dig through them for interesting setpieces, reskin them as super-science, and flavor
them with the style of whatever place they’re in. Never
hesitate to plunder existing content for your game. You
are but one GM, and your time and effort are finite.

176• ADVENTURE CREATION
What NPCs will I need to detail? When you detail an
NPC, you give them a hook, a motivation, a want, and
a power. The hook is simply some visual or behavioral
detail that will help them stick in the players’ memory. Reeking cigars, chrome-plated fingers, a habit of
finishing every sentence with ’you think?’, or any other unique detail can help the players remember them
when a name might slide off their recollections. These
hooks also give you a hint for descriptive detail when
you’re playing out an encounter with the PCs.
A motivation is simply that; what the NPC wants
from life, what immediate goal or ambition they have.
Often, this is related to the Problem; the NPC wants
a particular outcome from the situation. Sometimes
this is a broader life goal, like the desire for vast wealth,
or a particular person’s love, or revenge on an enemy.
A want is what they want specifically from the PCs.
Usually this is something that helps them achieve their
motivation, some assistance the PCs can give or action
they can take that will further the NPC’s motivation.
A power is what they can do to help or harm the PCs,
whether that consists of giving vital info, exerting their
influence for or against the PCs, or simply the threat
of their physical violence against the party. An NPC’s
power is why the PCs should care about their want.
Give the NPC combat statistics at this point if you
think it likely they’re going to get in a fight. Remember
that most people in the galaxy are normal human beings with no unique combat prowess. Just because an
NPC is the president of a megacorp doesn’t necessarily
mean he’s got more than 1 hit die, especially if he’s
led a life otherwise insulated from physical danger and
threats to his life.
What default outcomes will you need to establish?
In an unstable situation, it’s assumed that events will
shake out a certain way if the PCs don’t get involved,
or don’t try to redirect events a particular way. Take
a moment to decide what’s going to happen in the adventure if the players don’t change things. How will
the situation resolve itself, and what will happen to the
NPCs involved? If there’s a particular timeline to the
adventure, when certain things will happen at certain
times, note it down.
If the adventure is especially time-sensitive, make
sure the PCs are given adequate warning about it.
While the party might reasonably be expected to understand that a tribal assault on a fortified desert community isn’t going to continue forever, if the town is going
to collapse in three hours then they need to know that
every minute counts. Let NPCs warn them of the dwindling resistance, let the enemies make visible progress
toward success, and otherwise ensure that the natural
warnings inherent in the situation are properly passed
on to the players. They can’t realize how serious a situation is if the GM won’t tell them what their PCs can see.
What are the rewards to dealing with the Problem?
You need to figure out what exactly the PCs are supposed to be getting out of their efforts. If they’re plun-

dering an alien treasure-house, what exactly are they
going to find there? If they save the desert community,
what kind of help or reward do they receive? Is there
some way that solving this Problem will advance a PC’s
personal goals? Sometimes the reward of a situation is
simply avoiding some terrible outcome, but too many
of these charity jobs or self-defense adventures can
leave the players feeling like chumps.
Determining the rewards in experience points,
cash, or plunder can be delicate, so there’s a separate
section in this chapter devoted to helping you do just
that. Your choice will depend largely on how quickly
you want the PCs to advance in personal power and
how plausible it is that a given situation might offer a
considerable reward.
Lastly, how will the PCs get involved? You’ve got a
Person to hook them in, or the Problem itself is attractive to the PCs, but how exactly are you going to
connect the players to the adventure? Figure out the
details of how you’re going to introduce the adventure to the players and take note of the information,
resources, and situation they’ll encounter when they
step into the scenario.

Polish It Up

You’re almost finished with your adventure. All you
need to do now is put yourself in your party’s shoes
and think about how they’re likely to experience the
adventure. You know your players better than any
author could, so you know the ways they’re likely to
react to NPCs, how they like to deal with problems,
and what sort of things make them sympathetic or angry. Don’t worry about some platonic Ideal Adventurer
when you’re doing a mental walkthrough of the adventure. Worry about the people you know are going to
be playing this.
If you’ve created a sandbox-style adventure with
the steps above, there won’t be any written-out “path”
through the adventure. You’ll have a situation, some
NPCs, and the resources you need to handle the players
interacting with that situation. Maybe they’ll resolve
it to their liking, and maybe they’ll end the session by
booking a fast ship offplanet with a furious mob at their
heels. Your only concern at this stage is making sure
the adventure is logical, approachable, and engaging.
Is the adventure logical? If your adventure is contradicting facts that have already been established about
the world, the players are going to want to see a good
reason for it. If they break into a slum warehouse to
find it full of elite special-ops combatants, they’re going
to want a very good explanation for such a seemingly-irrational encounter. They don’t have to see every
explanation or understand every dramatic deviation
from reasonable expectations, but you should know
these reasons, and the players should be confident that
the reasons exist.
If you design an adventure by “story logic”, where
the most important thing is maintaining a genre feel

ADVENTURE CREATION •177
and good adventure pacing, the players are going to
react in story-logical ways. When presented with an
obstacle, they’re going to assume that their heroes are
expected to have a reasonable chance to overcome
that obstacle. When faced with a dangerous combat
foe, they’re going to assume the enemy is at least theoretically beatable by the group, and when encountering a seemingly-invincible challenge, they’re going to
look around for the right story levers to pull to make
it somewhat more vincible. This style of running a
game is perfectly valid, and it is indeed preferable for
groups that want to maintain a certain genre feel, but
it’s not usually how Stars Without Number adventures
get made.
The default Stars Without Number assumption is
that adventures operate on established setting logic. If
something should be somewhere, it is, whether or not
the PCs can hope to overcome it. If an ally is locked
away in the bowels of a max-security prison, the PCs
might simply not have any reasonable way to get them
out unless they can change the situation through supplemental adventures. When the PCs see a terrifyingly
dangerous foe, that foe really is terrifyingly dangerous,
and some PCs are almost certainly going to die if they
decide to fight. The PCs have no cosmic authorial protection, and if they put themselves in no-win situations,
they are going to lose.
With that in mind, look at your adventure and
make sure it is not the sort of challenge or situation
that would only be essayed by someone convinced that
they are the first-book protagonist of a sci-fi trilogy.
Don’t expect the PCs to do unreasonable things or face
ridiculous obstacles just because they’re part of the adventure. A canny player group will make a point of
avoiding unjustified perils and staying well clear of unbeatable difficulties. They won’t bite on your adventure
if it seems a fast-track journey to an unmarked grave.
Is the adventure approachable? This has to do with
your hook and the overall appeal of the situation. What
is it about this situation that’s going to pique player
interest? Knowing what you know about your players,
is this the sort of thing they’re going to jump into? Even
if you’re confident that the players will want to get involved, you need to make sure they have a clear way
into the situation. If it’s a roil of political intrigue, give
them somebody to contact. If it’s a mysterious alien
ruin, give them a map to it.
It’s not your job to develop a clear route through
the adventure, a step-by-step sequence of events that
can predictably lead to success. It is, however, your job
to give the PCs a way to get involved in the situation.
If you can’t see an obvious “first step” to the adventure,
then it’s unlikely your players will be able to see one.
Is the adventure engaging? An adventure which
is about something fundamentally uninteresting to the
players is just not going to hold their attention. Good
sports will try to get through it simply because it’s what
you created for them, but other players will start play-

ing with their phones, talking about extraneous matters, or just doing something else in-game. Even if the
PCs have a logical reason to care about the adventure,
if the players are not invested, they aren’t going to have
a very good time.
To build engagement, use elements your players
love and elements your players hate. What do your
players really like? What kind of NPCs, situations, and
activities do they really enjoy? Don’t worry about abstract players, just think about the specific people you
are playing with. Conversely, what kind of villains do
they absolutely despise? What sort of evildoing gets
them fired up with righteous wrath? It’s important
not to push things into gratuitous grimdark, but if you
have some players who really hate slavers, then that’s
a good cue to make beating down slavers an element
in an adventure.
Once you’ve polished up the adventure, done a
mental walk-through of events, and ensured that it is
logical, approachable, and engaging, then you’re ready
to play.

Creating Filler Adventures

Sometimes a GM gets caught flat-footed by the players.
They do something or choose a goal that the GM is
totally unprepared to manage. A GM is well within
their rights to call a pause and explain to the players
that they’re just not ready to handle that yet, and if the
players want to do it, they can do it next session, after
the GM has had time to prep something for it.
Other times, however, the GM will just throw in
a quick filler adventure. These are adventures built expressly for running when the GM is caught by surprise
or runs out of prepared content for the evening. Filler
adventures are built much like any other adventure, but
their priorities are different. Filler adventures should
be insistent, short, and simple.
The adventure needs to be insistent; it needs to
present a situation that the PCs absolutely must deal
with right this minute. A terrorist attack, a criminal
stealing a PC macguffin, a friend frantically calling for
help… the adventure needs to grab the PCs and distract
them from whatever it was they were trying to do.
Even so, the adventure should be short. A filler
adventure shouldn’t take longer to complete than it
takes for you to come up with a good response to the
players’ initial goal. You just need to keep the players
entertained long enough for you to figure out what
you’re going to do, so a filler adventure shouldn’t eat
up more than a session at most.
Lastly, the adventure should be simple. Don’t burn
yourself out on complex entanglements and relations
to the existing adventure. If you can come up with a
good tie-in quickly, great, but the ideal filler adventure
is general enough to slot in almost anywhere.
Unused bits and pieces of your regular adventures
can be used as filler components. Don’t waste your
work; if the PCs haven’t seen it, save it for later use.

178• ADVENTURE REWARDS

ADVENTURE REWARDS
Player characters all have their own reasons for seeking
adventure in the trackless void, but pragmatic rewards
of wealth, power, and influence tend to be popular.
When designing your adventures, how should you apportion rewards, whether in experience points, pretech
artifacts, or credits?

Rewarding Credits

The first thing to understand about the credit economy in your campaign is that “too much money” is not
a significant problem to have. Unlike many types of
games, there’s really nothing the PCs can do with large
amounts of money that will allow them to drastically improve their own personal power. They can hire
minions, they can buy starships, they can get cyberware,
and they can use their wealth as a bludgeon of influence,
but at the end of the day they still basically have the
same character sheet as before.
In the same vein, in a sandbox campaign there is
no storyline to disrupt. If the PCs suddenly luck into
a stellar tyrant’s ransom, then the campaign is about
what they do with the money. Maybe it lets them casually crush the problems they used to have, but now
they’ve got an entirely new set of concerns befitting
their newfound wealth. Unless the PCs simply decide
to stop adventuring after a lucky strike, their future
campaign sessions will simply be flavored with great
wealth and the problems and possibilities that come
along with it.
So don’t worry about “keeping the PCs hungry”.
Just let them acquire the logical amount of money that
their deeds and situation would earn them. If they do
a significant favor for a megacorp CEO, they should be
earning a lot more than they’d get from the heartfelt
gratitude of a lostworlder peasant whose life they saved.
With that in mind, here’s an adjacent list of reasonable credit amounts that can be applied to adventures.
If the PCs do work for someone, they’ll get paid to the
extent that they earned it and the patron can afford it.
If they come across lost loot or valuable cargo, you can
use these numbers to gauge what a “big haul” would be
to most people in the setting.

Rewarding Ships and Major Items

Most groups are going to want to get their own starship
relatively early on in the campaign. You might even
have the acquisition of a beaten-up merchant ship be
the result of the introductory adventure. While it’s
certainly possible for a sci-fi campaign to spend most
of its time on a single world or for PCs to hitch rides
with allies and existing transport ships, most players
are going to want to get their own set of thrusters.
The basic guideline for rewarding a ship or any
other major piece of hardware is that it’s going to take
at least one session of adventure to get it, assuming you

Reward Type
A lot of money to a slum dweller
Slum dweller’s maximum funds
A lot of money to an ordinary worker
Ordinary worker’s maximum funds
A lot of money to an affluent person
Affluent person’s maximum funds
A lot of money to a wealthy person
Wealthy person’s maximum funds
A lot of money to an oligarch
Oligarch’s available liquid funds
Moderately-skilled short contract work

Amount
50
100
500
1,000
2,500
5,000
25,000
100,000
1 million
5 million
20 / day

An illegal but not serious crime job

500

Serious but non-capital criminal job
Kill someone who isn’t very important
Kill a significant or well-guarded target
Kill a major government official

1,000
5,000
50,000
250,000

think it’s reasonable to allow it in the first place. The
PCs are going to have to come up with a plan or look
for an opportunity to grab the thing they want if they
don’t have the money to buy it outright.
You can use this principle when the PCs want
anything, whether it’s a ship, a particular ally, a base
of operations, or anything else that can’t reasonably
buy. Make them adventure for it. You can give them
suggestions and ideas, but it’s up to them to come up
with a plan for getting their hands on what they want.
Once they’ve done that, all you need to do is make
up an adventure revolving around their efforts, and
you’ve got your evening’s entertainment. As always,
you should be watchful for opportunities to make PC
ambitions into easy adventure outlines.

Rewarding Experience Points

There are several different methods to award experience points. The one you choose will depend largely on
the kind of campaign you want to run and the speed of
advancement you want for the PCs.
The basic experience award for each member of
a party is three points. This assumes a fairly fast rate
of advancement, with PCs reaching second level after
their first award. If you want a slower one, drop it to
two points, or even one. All members of the group
should get the same basic award unless you want PCs
of different levels in your group.
When do you hand out this basic award? You have
several different choices.
Use a session-based system. Hand out the award at
the end of every gaming session, assuming the PCs
were trying to accomplish something worthy of their

ADVENTURE REWARDS •179

skills. Parties that coast along without facing any real
challenges might not receive the award.
Use a personal goal-based system. Have every PC list
at least one long-term goal and one short-term goal.
If they achieve a short-term goal during the session,
give them a basic award. If they manage to succeed at
a long-term goal, give them triple that amount of experience. Different characters can share the same goals if
they wish, and it’s up to the GM to decide whether or
not a particular goal is challenging enough to deserve
a reward. PCs can pick new goals or change old ones
at the end of each session.
Note that if you use this method different PCs will
advance at different rates, depending on how often they
reach their goals. This isn’t a problem if the group is
fine with it, and if PCs work to make sure the party
isn’t focusing too much on the goals of only a few members. If you want to help encourage spreading the focus
around, you can rule that no PC can get goal XP again
until someone else in the group has achieved a goal.
Use a mission-based system. Have the group agree
on a mission or goal at the end of each session or at the
start of the campaign. When the group reaches that
goal, they all get an experience award. They can choose
to change their goal at the end of every session, or pick
a new one if they’ve attained their original purpose. If
they choose a particularly hard mission they might get
an extra bonus, at the cost of a greater risk of failure.

Use a loot-based system. This sort of campaign
doesn’t use experience points. Instead, it uses cash.
Every PC needs to earn 5,000 credits of liquid funds
in rewards or loot before reaching second level. Then
they need to earn 10,000 more to reach third, 20,000
more to reach fourth, and so on, with the new amount
needed doubling at each level. Only wealth they’ve
earned adventuring and converted into spendable credits counts toward this amount. Once a PC gains a level,
their running “score” is reset to zero, and even huge
hauls can’t boost them more than one level at a time.
This experience method strongly incentivizes
ruthless plundering, and might result in uneven advancement if the party doesn’t split their earnings evenly. It does make for a laser-focused game of freebooting
avarice, however.
Use a spending-based system. This works the same
way as the loot-based system, but the credits they earn
only count if the PC spends them. Credits spent on personal equipment, cyberware, vehicles, or other directly
useful items don’t count. Only credits “wasted” in revelry, charity, supporting some NPC cause, building a
power base, or otherwise interacting with the game
world count toward the PC’s advancement.
This, too, can result in a party with PCs of varying character level over time, as some choose to buy
hardware and others elect to “waste” the money. It does
encourage a great deal of engagement, however.

180• PROBLEMS

CREATING PROBLEMS
Every Problem boils down to a fundamental conflict. A
person wants something and they can’t have it, or they
don’t want something and are being forced to accept
it, or they have something and it’s being threatened, or
they want something and someone else wants it too. At
the bottom of every Problem there’s a conflict the PCs
can engage. These tables on these two pages provide
some cues for generating Problems for your adventures.
First, roll 1d8, 1d10, and 1d10 on the Conflict
Type table on the opposite page. The first roll gives
you an idea of the general type of conflict at the bottom
of the adventure. It might be a matter of money, old
grudges, a natural catastrophe, ethnic struggles, or one
of several other root causes. You can stop at this point
if the cue is sufficiently inspirational.
Otherwise, the next roll gives you the overall situation of the conflict. This is the backdrop to the adventure, and while the PCs may not be able to resolve the
entire conflict, they should be able to make a difference
in this particular skirmish. You can take this general
context and decide on a specific event or situation that’s
causing the conflict at the heart of the Problem.
If further inspiration is needed, the third roll gives
you a specific focus for the Problem. Something is happening, and there are at least two sides involved; one
that is in favor of what is happening, and one that is

opposed. Just put forces on both sides of the focus and
you’ll have your starting Problem.
Some Problems have the PCs on one of the sides.
If “Money was stolen from someone” and “The PCs are
owed it”, then the PCs themselves will have a powerful
incentive to involve themselves in the conflict. Other
Problems only have people on one side; if there’s a catastrophic natural disaster, the disaster itself is unlikely
to have motivations or goals, while the hapless victims
doubtless are struggling to survive.
To add further decoration to the circumstances,
you can roll on the tables below. The Restraint table
gives you a reason why the conflict hasn’t boiled over
yet, and why the PCs might be a wildcard that can resolve the problem at hand. Some Problems can keep
a long time with a sufficiently stern Restraint, which
makes them convenient when you need to make filler
adventures that can stay in storage until you need them.
The Twist table gives you a turn you can add to
the Problem, something to complicate the situation and
shake up easy assumptions about how it will play out.
At all times, you should be looking for chances to
insert elements you’ve already created for this world.
Use Enemies for antagonists, Friends for allies, and
slip in Complications when you need additional twists.
GMing is tough enough without making extra work.

d20

The Restraint

The Twist

1

The government is cracking down on the conflict

There’s a very sharp time limit for any resolution

2

One side seems invincibly stronger to the other

The sympathetic side is actually a bunch of bastards

3

Both sides have “doomsday” info or devices

There’s an easy but very repugnant solution to hand

4

A prior conflict ended horribly for both of them

PC success means a big benefit to a hostile group

5

Foreign participants are keeping things tamped

The real bone of contention is hidden from most

6

Elements of both sides seek accommodation

A sympathetic figure’s on an unsympathetic side

7

The conflict is only viable in a narrow location

There’s a profitable chance for PCs to turn traitor

8

Catastrophic cost of losing a direct showdown

The “winner” will actually get in terrible trouble

9

Each thinks they’ll win without further exertion

There’s a very appealing third party in the mix

10

They expect a better opening to appear soon

The PCs could really profit off the focus of the strife

11

Former ties of friendship or family restrain them

The PCs are mistaken for an involved group

12

Religious principles are constraining them

Somebody plans on screwing over the PCs

13

One side’s still licking their wounds after a failure

Both sides think the PCs are working for them

14

They’re building up force to make sure they win

A side wants to use the PCs as a distraction for foes

15

Their cultural context makes open struggle hard

The PCs’ main contact is mistrusted by their allies

16

They expect an outside power to hand them a win

If the other side can’t get it, they’ll destroy it

17

They’re still searching for a way to get at their goal

The focus isn’t nearly as valuable as both sides think

18

One side mistakenly thinks they’ve already won

The focus somehow has its own will and goals

19

A side is busy integrating a recent success

Victory will drastically change one of the sides

20

An outside power threatens both sides

Actually, there is no twist. It’s all exactly as it seems.

PROBLEMS •181
d8
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Conflict Type
Money

Revenge

Power

Natural Danger

Religion

Ideology

Ethnicity

Resources

d10

Overall Situation

d10

Specific Focus

1-2

Money is owed to a ruthless creditor

1-2

Organized crime wants it

3-4

Money was stolen from someone

3-4

Corrupt officials want it

5-6

A sudden profit opportunity arises

5-6 A sympathetic NPC needs it

7-8

There’s a hidden stash of wealth

7-8

The PCs are owed it

9-0

Money is offered from an evil source

9-0

It will disappear very soon

1-2

Someone was murdered

1-2

It was wholly justified

3-4

Someone was stripped of rank

3-4

The wrong person is targeted

5-6

Someone lost all their wealth

5-6 The reaction is excessive

7-8

Someone lost someone’s love

7-8

The PCs are somehow blamed

9-0

Someone was framed for a crime

9-0

Both sides were wronged

1-2

An influential political leader

1-2

They’ve betrayed their own

3-4

A stern community elder

3-4

Someone’s gunning for them

5-6

A ruling patriarch of a large family

5-6 They made a terrible choice

7-8

A star expert in a particular industry

7-8

9-0

A criminal boss or outcast leader

9-0 They’re oppressing their own

1-2

A cyclical planetary phenomenon

1-2

Anti-helpful bureaucrats

3-4

A sudden natural disaster

3-4

Religious zealots panic

5-6

Sudden loss of vital infrastructure

5-6

Bandits and looters strike

7-8

Catastrophe from outside meddling

7-8

The government hushes it up

9-0

Formerly-unknown planetary peril

9-0 There’s money in exploiting it

1-2

Sects that hate each other bitterly

1-2

Charismatic new leader

3-4

Zealot reformers forcing new things

3-4

Mandatory state religion

5-6

Radical traditionalists fighting back

5-6

Heavy foreign influence

7-8

Ethnic religious divisions

7-8

Religious purging underway

9-0

Corrupt and decadent institutions

9-0

Fighting for holy ground

1-2

A universally-despised fringe group

1-2

Terrorist attack

3-4

Terrorists with widespread support

3-4

Street rioting

5-6

A political party’s goon squads

5-6

Police state crackdown

7-8

Dead-end former regime supporters

7-8

Forced expulsions

9-0

Ruthless ascendant political group

9-0 Territory under hostile rule

1-2

A traditionally subordinate group

1-2

Forced immigration

3-4

An ethnic group from offworld

3-4

Official ethnic ghettos

5-6

A dominant caste or ethnicity

5-6

Rigid separation of groups

7-8

An alien or transhuman group

7-8

Group statuses have changed

9-0

Two groups that hate each other

9-0

Rising ethnic violence

1-2

There’s a cache of illegal materials

1-2

Someone thinks they own it

3-4

A hidden strike of rare resources

3-4

The state is looking for it

5-6

Cargo has been abandoned as lost

5-6

It has its own protectors

7-8

Land ownership is disputed

7-8

Rights to it were stolen

9-0

A resource is desperately necessary

9-0

Offworlders want it badly

They usurped their position

182• PEOPLE

CREATING PEOPLE
You’ll need People to help the PCs get involved in your
adventure and to flesh out the personalities and important figures in the Problem. Not every NPC needs
to be worked up fully, but it can be convenient to have
a few spare People around to drop in when the players
suddenly take an interest in a bit-player NPC you never
expected they’d focus on.
To generate a Person, start with their motivation.
This is what the Person wants out of life, their major
focus and drive. The deals they offer and the actions
they take should revolve around this motivation. Different people will go to different extremes to follow
this motivation, so you shouldn’t feel obligated to make
it a monomania for them, but it’s the basic driver of
their actions.
Next, pick a want. This is the immediate thing the
NPC thinks will most effectively advance their motivation. If the latter is “Promote a friend or offspring’s
career” and the want is “Burn down or destroy a particular structure”, then you simply have to figure out how
burning down that place is going to advance the NPC’s
daughter’s career. The want is what the NPC is most
likely to desire the PCs to help them achieve.
Now determine their power. This is what the
NPC can use to pay off the PCs or threaten them into
compliance. If a Person hasn’t got any power to help
d20

Initial Manner

or harm the party, the PCs aren’t going to have much
motivation to care about their wants. Not every NPC
will have much power, but they should all be able to do
something to help or hinder the PCs.
Then you determine a hook, a visual or character
quirk that will help you describe them during play and
help the players remember who they are.
Lastly, if you want to make life a little easier for
yourself, you can roll or pick an initial manner of
approach and a default deal outcome for the Person.
These additional tables help smooth out the handling
of PC deals and negotiations with the NPC.
The initial manner is simply how the NPC will
deal with the PCs during their initial meeting. Maybe
they’ll be effusively appreciative of the party’s capabilities, or maybe they’ll be full of thin-lipped disapproval,
but their manner can give you some cues for playing
out the NPC’s interactions with the party.
The default deal outcome can give you a cue as to
how or if the NPC will keep any deal they make with
the PCs. In some cases, you’ll already know whether
or not the NPC will play fair with the party, either because you know they’re essentially trustworthy people
or you know they’re double-dipped bastards. The table
is convenient when you’re not quite sure if an NPC is
as good as their word.
Default Deal Outcome

1

Ingratiating and cloying

They’ll screw the PCs over even at their own cost

2

Grim suspicion of the PCs or their backers

They firmly intend to actively betray the PCs

3

Xenophilic interest in the novelty of the PCs

They won’t keep the deal unless driven to it

4

Pragmatic and businesslike

They plan to twist the deal to their own advantage

5

Romantically interested in one or more PCs

They won’t keep their word unless it’s profitable

6

A slimy used-gravcar dealer’s approach

They’ll flinch from paying up when the time comes

7

Wide-eyed awe at the PCs

They mean to keep the deal, but are reluctant

8

Cool and superior attitude toward PC “hirelings”

They’ll keep most of the deal, but not all of it

9

Benevolently patronizing toward outsiders

They’ll keep the deal slowly and grudgingly

10

Sweaty-palmed need or desperation

They’ll keep the deal but won’t go out of their way

11

Xenophobic mistrust of the PCs

They’ll be reasonably punctual about the deal

12

Idealistic enthusiasm for a potentially shared cause

They’ll want a further small favor to pay up on it

13

Somewhat intoxicated by recent indulgence

They’ll keep the deal in a way that helps them

14

Smoothly persuasive and reasonable

They’ll keep the deal if it’s still good for them

15

Visibly uncomfortable with the PCs

They’ll offer a bonus for an additional favor

16

Grossly overconfident in PC abilities

Trustworthy as long as the deal won’t hurt them

17

Somewhat frightened by the PCs

Trustworthy, with the NPC following through

18

Deeply misunderstanding the PCs’ culture

They’ll be very fair in keeping to their agreements

19

Extremely well-informed about the PCs’ past

They’ll keep bargains even to their own cost

20

Distracted by their current situation

Complete and righteous integrity to the bitter end

PEOPLE •183
d20

Their Motivation

Their Want

1

An ambition for greater social status

Bring them an exotic piece of tech

2

Greed for wealth and indulgent riches

Convince someone to meet with the NPC

3

Protect a loved one who is somehow imperiled

Kill a particular NPC

4

A sheer sadistic love of inflicting pain and suffering

Kidnap or non-fatally eliminate a particular NPC

5

Hedonistic enjoyment of pleasing company

Pay them a large amount of money

6

Searching out hidden knowledge or science

Take a message to someone hard to reach

7

Establishing or promoting a cultural institution

Acquire a tech component that’s hard to get

8

Avenging a grievous wrong to them or a loved one

Find proof of a particular NPC’s malfeasance

9

Promoting their religion and living out their faith

Locate a missing NPC

10

Winning the love of a particular person

Bring someone to a destination via dangerous travel

11

Winning glory and fame in their profession

Retrieve a lost or stolen object

12

Dodging an enemy who is pursuing them

Defend someone from an impending attack

13

Driving out or killing an enemy group

Burn down or destroy a particular structure

14

Deposing a rival to them in their line of work

Explore a dangerous or remote location

15

Getting away from this world or society

Steal something from a rival NPC or group

16

Promote a friend or offspring’s career or future

Intimidate a rival into ceasing their course of action

17

Taking control of a property or piece of land

Commit a minor crime to aid the NPC

18

Building a structure or a complex prototype tech

Trick a rival into doing something

19

Perform or create their art to vast acclaim

Rescue an NPC from a dire situation

20

Redeem themselves from a prior failure

Force a person or group to leave an area

d20

Their Power

Their Hook

1

They’re just really appealing and sympathetic to PCs A particular odd style of dress

2

They have considerable liquid funds

An amputation or other maiming

3

They control the use of large amounts of violence

Visible cyberware or prosthetics

4

They have a position of great social status

Unusual hair, skin, or eye colors

5

They’re a good friend of an important local leader

Scarring, either intentional or from old injuries

6

They have blackmail info on the PCs

Tic-like overuse of a particular word or phrase

7

They have considerable legal influence here

Specific unusual fragrance or cologne

8

They have tech the PCs might reasonably want

Constant fiddling with a particular item

9

They can get the PCs into a place they want to go

Visible signs of drug use

10

They know where significant wealth can be found

Always seems to be in one particular mood

11

They have information about the PCs’ current goal

Wears badges or marks of allegiance to a cause

12

An NPC the PCs need has implicit trust in them

Extremely slow or fast pace of speech

13

The NPC can threaten someone the PCs like

Wheezes, shakes, or other signs of infirmity

14

They control a business relevant to PC needs

Constantly with a drink to hand

15

They have considerable criminal contacts

Always complaining about a group or organization

16

They have pull with the local religion

Paranoid, possibly for justifiable reasons

17

They know a great many corrupt politicians

Insists on a particular location for all meetings

18

They can alert the PCs to an unexpected peril

Communicates strictly through a third party

19

They’re able to push a goal the PCs currently have

Abnormally obese, emaciated, tall, or short

20

They can get the PCs useful permits and rights

Always found with henchmen or friends

184• PLACES

CREATING PLACES
Places can be very simple to create or very complex. If
a Place is only needed as a backdrop for events and you
don’t expect the PCs to spend much time exploring it,
you really don’t need anything more than a name and
a few sentences of description for the table. If it’s to be
an alien ruin, enemy base, or some other structure that
the PCs are going to carefully interact with, you’ll need
something more interesting.
For the former type of place, just pull an appropriate Place from the world generation data you’ve already
created. You can then give it some background activity
from the table below. If it’s an urban, civilized sort of
location, you can roll for a Civilized Ongoing to indicate what’s happening there right now. If it’s a lost ruin,
wilderness glade, or other wild place, roll or pick from
the Wilderness Ongoings list.
If the PCs plan to investigate the place, you’ll want
a Reward to determine what worthwhile thing the PCs
might find there. In some cases, you’ll already know
what the Reward should be; if the PCs are going into
an alien ruin to dig out a lost macguffin, then the macguffin itself will be the reward. You can still use the
Reward table to create some secondary loot prospects
in the place if you wish, the better to reward careful
exploration and creative overcoming of the area’s inevitable hazards.
d20

Reward

Those hazards can be derived from the opposite
table. The first roll gives a general type of hazard that
the PCs will have to face in an area or sub-area of the
Place, while the specific examples and possible dangers
provide more concrete suggestions.
You can apply these hazards to specific parts of
the Place, or if the area is too small to sustain much
mayhem, you might roll once and apply it generally to
the entire location.
One of the easiest ways to quickly produce an interesting area to explore is to go online and loot the
web for old-school-style fantasy adventure modules.
In many cases, the maps and floor plans can be stolen
outright, while the room contents can be reskinned
with suitably sci-fi flavor. Most of these old adventures
use game mechanics that are similar to those used by
Stars Without Number, such as hit points, Armor Classes, damage rolls, and gold piece values that can easily
be converted to credits. If you mix and match these
components, using pieces from multiple adventures to
stitch together what you need, even those players who
might have experienced the original adventure won’t
be able to recognize your handiwork.
This principle of constructive looting is important
to any sandbox GM. Save creative energy for where it
counts. Everywhere else, plunder without shame.

Civilized Ongoings

Wilderness Ongoings

1

Large cache of credits

Local festival going on

Bandits have moved in

2

Precious cultural artifact

Angry street protests

Flooding swept through

3

Vital data on the party’s goal

Minor fire or other disorder

Part of it has collapsed

4

Missing or kidnapped VIP

Merchants and peddlers active

Refugees are hiding here

5

Advanced pretech artifact

Tourists from another country

Dangerous animals lair here

6

Key to some guarded location

Building repair or maintenance

A rebel cell uses it for a base

7

Ancient treasure object

Recent vehicle crash

Smugglers have landed here

8

Recently-stolen goods

Public art performance

Foreign agents meet here

9

High-tech robotic servitor

Angry traffic jam

A hermit has taken up residence

10

Token item of ruling legitimacy

Missionaries for a local religion

A toxic plant is growing wild

11

Juicy blackmail material

Loud advertising campaign

An artist seeks inspiration here

12

History-rewriting evidence

Memorial service ongoing

An ancient structure was dug out

13

Alien artifact of great power

Road work halting traffic

The weather has turned savage

14

Precious megacorp data files

Power outage in the area

A vehicle crashed nearby

15

Map to some valuable thing

Police chasing criminals

Some locals are badly lost

16

Forbidden but precious drug

Annoying drunks being loud

Religious pilgrims come here

17

Legal title to important land

Beggars seeking alms

Locals fight over control of it

18

Awful secret of local government

Constructing a new building

Nature threatens to wipe it out

19

Cache of precious goods

Local thugs swaggering around

An old shrine was raised here

20

Stock of valuable weaponry

Aerial light display

A shell of a building remains

PLACES •185
d8
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Hazard
Social

Legal

Environmental

Trap

Animal

Sentient

Decay

PC-induced

d10

Specific Example

d10

Possible Danger

1-2

An explosively temperamental VIP

1-2

An allied NPC breaks ties

3-4

An unknown but critical social taboo

3-4 An enemy is alerted to them

5-6

A case of mistaken identity

5-6 A new enemy is made

7-8

An expectation for specific PC action

7-8

9-0

A frame job hung on the PCs

9-0 An opportunity is lost

1-2

A regulation unknown to the PCs

1-2

Substantial monetary fine

3-4

A tax or confiscation

3-4

Imprisonment for the party

5-6

Vital gear is prohibited here

5-6

Confiscation of possessions

7-8

Lawsuit from an aggrieved NPC

7-8

Deportation from the place

9-0

A state agent conscripts PC help

9-0

Loss of rights and protections

1-2

Heavy background radiation

1-2

Catch a lingering disease

3-4

A planetary sickness foreigners get

3-4

Suffer bodily harm

5-6

Strong or weak local gravity

5-6 Take a penalty on rolls

7-8

Gear-eating microbial life

7-8

Lose some equipment

9-0

Unpredictable psychic power field

9-0

Psychic abilities are altered

1-2

Alarm system attached to a trap

1-2

Something set on fire

3-4

Snare left for local animals

3-4

Guards are summoned

5-6

Hermit’s self-defense measure

5-6

Fall to a new area

7-8

Long-dead builder’s trapsmithing

7-8

Equipment is damaged

9-0

New occupant’s defensive trap

9-0

Subject is injured

1-2

Dangerous local swarm vermin

1-2

They have a ranged attack

3-4

A big predator lair

3-4

They’re venomous

5-6

Pack hunters haunt the area

5-6

Dangerously coordinated foe

7-8

Flying threats pounce here

7-8

Killing them inflicts a fine

9-0

Monstrous beast sleeps or is torpid

9-0 Their deaths cause an effect

1-2

A group hostile to intruders

1-2

Immediate combat

3-4

Trickster thieves and con-men

3-4

Treacherous feigned friend

5-6

Hostile expert-system robots

5-6

Lead the PCs into a trap

7-8

Secrecy-loving rebels or criminals

7-8

Demand payment or loot

9-0

Another area-clearing group

9-0 Activate other area defenses

1-2

Crumbling floor or ceiling

1-2

Ruptures to release a peril

3-4

Waste or heating tubes rupture

3-4

Toxic or radioactive debris

5-6

Dangerous standing liquid

5-6

Explosive decompression

7-8

Maintenance robots gone haywire

7-8

Invisible or slow-acting toxin

9-0

Power plant is unstable

9-0

Fires or explosions

1-2

Activating a system causes a disaster

1-2

Horrible vermin are admitted

3-4

Catastrophic plan proposed by NPCs

3-4

Local system goes berserk

5-6

Removing loot triggers defenses

5-6

Something ruptures violently

7-8

Handling an object ruins it

7-8

Ancient defenses awaken

9-0

Leaving a thing open brings calamity

9-0 The PC’s goal is imperiled

Cads think the PCs are allies

186• ADVENTURE SEEDS

ADVENTURE SEEDS
The hundred ideas that follow are basic outlines for
various adventures. Just take the components you’ve
rolled for a given planet, slot them in the spaces noted
in the adventure seeds, and build out from there to
create an evening’s entertainment.
If you want something more complicated than
these basic seeds provide, you can string several of
them together, gluing them into a single perilous circumstance to occupy the heroes.
As a general rule of thumb, a single seed should
occupy the group for a single session’s worth of adventure. If you need to create more content than that, you
can scale events by adding additional complications or
breaking the adventure up into several additional tasks
or obstacles that must be overcome before the PCs can
successfully resolve it.
1. An Enemy seeks to rob a Friend of some precious
Thing that he has desired for some time.
2. A Thing has been discovered on property owned
by a Friend, but a Complication risks its destruction.
3. A Complication suddenly hits the party while
they’re out doing some innocuous activity.
4. The players unwittingly offend or injure an Enemy,
incurring his or her wrath. A Friend offers help in
escaping the consequences.
5. Rumor speaks of the discovery of a precious Thing
in a distant Place. The players must get to it before
an Enemy does.
6. An Enemy has connections with offworld pirates
or slavers, and a Friend has been captured by them.
7. A Place has been seized by violent revolutionaries
or rebels, and a Friend is being held hostage by
them.
8. A Friend is in love with someone forbidden by social convention, and the two of them need help
eloping.
9. An Enemy wields tyrannical power over a Friend,
relying on the bribery of corrupt local officials to
escape consequences.
10. A Friend has been lost in hostile wilderness, and
the party must reach a Place to rescue them in the
teeth of a dangerous Complication.
11. An Enemy has committed a grave offense against a
PC or their family sometime in the past. A Friend
shows the party a weakness in the Enemy’s defenses.
12. The party is suddenly caught in a conflict between
two warring families or political parties.
13. The party is framed for a crime by an Enemy, and
must reach the sanctuary of a Place before they can
regroup and find the Thing that will prove their
innocence and their Enemy’s perfidy.

14. A Friend is threatened by a tragedy of sickness, legal calamity, or public humiliation, and the only
one that seems able to save them is an Enemy.
15. A natural disaster or similar Complication strikes
a Place while the party is present, causing great
loss of life and property unless the party is able to
immediately respond to the injured and trapped.
16. A Friend with a young business has struck a cache
of pretech, valuable minerals, or precious salvage.
He needs the party to help him reach the Place
where the valuables are.
17. An oppressed segment of society starts a sudden
revolt in the Place the party is occupying. An Enemy simply lumps the party in with the rebels and
tries to put the revolt down with force. A Friend
offers them a way to either help the rebels or clear
their names.
18. A vulnerable Friend has been targeted for abduction, and has need of guards. A sudden Complication makes guarding them from the Enemy seeking
their kidnapping much more difficult. If the Friend
is snatched, they must rescue them from a Place.
19. A mysterious Place offers the promise of some
precious Thing, but access is very dangerous due
to wildlife, hostile locals, or a dangerous environment.
20. An Enemy and a Friend both have legal claim on
a Thing, and seek to undermine each other’s case.
The Enemy is willing to do murder if he thinks he
can get away with it.
21. An Enemy seeks the death of his brother, a Friend,
by arranging the failure of his grav flyer or shuttlecraft in dangerous terrain while the party is coincidentally aboard. The party must survive the
environment and bring proof of the crime out
with them.
22. A Friend seeks to slip word to a lover, one who is
also being courted by the Friend’s brother, who
is an Enemy. A Complication threatens to cause
death or disgrace to the lover unless they either
accept the Enemy’s suit or are helped by the party.
23. An Enemy is convinced that one of the party has
committed adultery with their flirtatious spouse.
He means to lure them to a Place, trap them, and
have them killed by the dangers there.
24. An Enemy has been driven insane by exotic recreational drugs or excessive psionic torching. He
fixes on a PC as being his mortal nemesis, and
plots elaborate deaths, attempting to conceal his
involvement amid Complications.
25. A Friend has stolen a precious Thing from an Enemy and fled into a dangerous, inaccessible Place.
The party must rescue them, and decide what to do
with the Thing and the outraged Enemy.

ADVENTURE SEEDS •187
26. An Enemy has realized that their brother or sister
has engaged in a socially unacceptable affair with
a Friend, and means to kill both of them unless
stopped by the party.
27. A Friend has accidentally caused the death of a
family member, and wants the party to help him
hide the body or fake an accidental death before
his family realizes what has happened. A Complication suddenly makes the task more difficult.
28. A Friend is a follower of a zealous ideologue who
plans to make a violent demonstration of the
righteousness of his cause, causing a social Complication. The Friend will surely be killed in the
aftermath if not rescued or protected by the party.
29. A Friend’s sibling is to be placed in a dangerous
situation they’ve got no chance of surviving. The
Friend takes their place at the last moment, and
will almost certainly die unless the party aids them.
30. Suicide bombers detonate an explosive, chemical,
or biological weapon in a Place occupied by the
party where a precious Thing is stored The PCs
must escape before the Place collapses on top of
them, navigating throngs of terrified people in the
process and saving the Thing if possible.
31. An Enemy who controls landing permits, oxygen
rations, or some other important resource has a
prejudice against one or more of the party members. He demands that they bring him a Thing
from a dangerous Place before he’ll give them the
goods.
32. A Friend in a loveless marriage to an Enemy seeks
escape to be with their beloved, and contacts the
party to snatch them from their spouse’s guards at
a prearranged Place.
33. A Friend seeks to elope with their lover, and contacts the party to help them meet their paramour
at a remote, dangerous Place. On arrival, they find
that the lover is secretly an Enemy desirous of their
removal and merely lured them to the place to
meet their doom.
34. The party receives or finds a Thing which proves
the crimes of an Enemy- yet a Friend was complicit
in the crimes, and will be punished as well if the
authorities are involved. And the Enemy will stop
at nothing to get the item back.
35. A Friend needs to get to a Place on time in order to
complete a business contract, but an Enemy means
to delay and hinder them until it’s too late, inducing Complications to the trip.
36. A locked pretech stasis pod has been discovered by
a Friend, along with directions to the hidden keycode that will open it. The Place where the keycode
is hidden is now owned by an Enemy.
37. A fierce schism has broken out in the local majority
religion, and an Enemy is making a play to take
control of the local hierarchy. A Friend is on the
side that will lose badly if the Enemy succeeds, and
needs a Thing to prove the other group’s error.

38. A former Enemy has been given reason to repent
his treatment of a Friend, and secretly commissions them to help the Friend overcome a Complication. A different Enemy discovers the connection, and tries to paint the PCs as double agents.
39. An alien or a human with extremely peculiar spiritual beliefs seeks to visit a Place for their own reasons. An Enemy of their own kind attempts to stop
them before they can reach the Place, and reveal
the Thing that was hidden there long ago.
40. A Friend’s sibling is an untrained psychic, and has
been secretly using his or her powers to protect
the Friend from an Enemy. The neural damage
has finally overwhelmed their sanity, and they’ve
now kidnapped the Friend to keep them safe. The
Enemy is taking this opportunity to make sure
the Friend “dies at the hands of their maddened
sibling”.
41. A Friend who is a skilled precognitive has just received a flash of an impending atrocity to be committed by an Enemy. He or she needs the party
to help them steal the Thing that will prove the
Enemy’s plans while dodging the assassins sent to
eliminate the precog.
42. A Friend who is an exotic dancer is sought by an
Enemy who won’t take no for an answer. The
dancer is secretly a Perimeter agent attempting to
infiltrate a Place to destroy maltech research, and
plots to use the party to help get him or her into
the facility under the pretext of striking at the Enemy.
43. A young woman on an interplanetary tour needs
the hire of local bodyguards. She turns out to be a
trained and powerful combat psychic, but touchingly naive about local dangers, causing a social
Complication that threatens to get the whole
group arrested.
44. A librarian Friend has discovered an antique databank with the coordinates of a long-lost pretech
cache hidden in a Place sacred to a long-vanished
religion. The librarian is totally unsuited for danger, but necessary to decipher the obscure religious
iconography needed to unlock the cache. The
cache is not the anticipated Thing, but something
more dangerous to the finder.
45. A fragment of orbital debris clips a shuttle on the
way in, and the spaceport is seriously damaged in
the crash. The player’s ship or the only vessel capable of getting them off-planet will be destroyed
unless the players can organize a response to the
dangerous chemical fires and radioactives contaminating the port. A Friend is trapped somewhere
in the control tower wreckage.
46. A Friend is allied with a reformist religious group
that seeks to break the grip of the current, oppressive hierarchy. The current hierarchs have a great
deal of political support with the authorities, but
the commoners resent them bitterly. The Friend

188• ADVENTURE SEEDS
seeks to secure a remote Place as a meeting-place
for the theological rebels.
47. A microscopic black hole punctures an orbital station or starship above the world. Its interaction
with the station’s artificial grav generators has
thrown everything out of whack, and the station’s become a minefield of dangerously high or
zero grav zones. It’s tearing itself apart, and it’s
going to collapse soon. An Enemy seeks to escape
aboard the last lifeboat and to Hell with everyone
else. Meanwhile, a Friend is trying to save his engineer daughter from the radioactive, grav-unstable
engine rooms.
48. The planet has a sealed alien ruin, and an Enemy-led cult who worships the vanished builders.
They’re convinced that they have the secret to
opening and controlling the power inside the ruins, but they’re only half-right. A Friend has found
evidence that shows that they’ll only devastate the
planet if they meddle with the alien power planet.
The party has to get inside the ruins and shut down
the engines before it’s too late. Little do they realize that a few aliens survive inside, in a stasis field
that will be broken by the ruin’s opening.
49. An Enemy and the group are suddenly trapped in
a Place during an accident or Complication. They
must work together to escape in time.
50. A telepathic Friend has discovered that an Enemy
was responsible for a recent atrocity. Telepathic
evidence is useless on this world, however, and if
she’s discovered to have scanned his mind she’ll be
lobotomized as a ’rogue psychic’. A Thing might
be enough to prove his guilt, if the party can figure out how to get to it without revealing their
Friend’s meddling.
51. A Friend is responsible for safeguarding a Thingyet the Thing is suddenly proven to be a fake. The
party must find the real object and the Enemy who
stole it or else their Friend will be punished as the
thief.
52. A Friend is bitten by a poisonous local animal
while in a remote Place. The only antidote is back
at civilization, yet a Complication threatens to delay the group until it is too late.
53. A lethal plague has started among the residents of
the town, but a Complication is keeping aid from
reaching them. An Enemy is taking advantage of
the panic to hawk a fake cure at ruinous prices,
and a Friend is taken in by him. The Complication
must be overcome before help can reach the town.
54. A radical political party has started to institute
pogroms against “groups hostile to the people”. A
Friend is among those groups, and needs to get out
of town before an Enemy uses the riot as cover to
settle old scores.
55. An Enemy has sold the party an expensive but
worthlessly flawed piece of equipment before

lighting out for the back country. He and his plunder are holed up at a remote Place.
56. A concert of offworld music is being held in town,
and a Friend is slated to be the star performer. Reactionary elements led by an Enemy plot to ruin
the “corrupting noise” with sabotage that risks
getting performers killed. Meanwhile, a crowd
of ignorant offworlder fans have landed and are
infuriating the locals.
57. An Enemy is wanted on a neighboring world for
some heinous act, and a Friend turns up as a bounty hunter ready to bring him in alive. This world
refuses to extradite him, so the capture and retrieval has to evade local law enforcement.
58. An unanticipated solar storm blocks communications and grounds the poorly-shielded grav vehicle
that brought the group to this remote Place. Then
people start turning up dead; the storm has awoken a dangerous Enemy beast.
59. A Friend has discovered a partially-complete schematic for an ancient pretech refinery unit that produces vast amounts of something precious on this
world- water, oxygen, edible compounds, or the
like. Several remote Places on the planet are indicated as having the necessary pretech spare parts
required to build the device. When finally assembled, embedded self-modification software in the
Thing modifies itself into a pretech combat bot.
The salvage from it remains very valuable.
60. A Complication ensnares the party where they are
in an annoying but seemingly ordinary event. In
actuality, an Enemy is using it as cover to strike at
a Friend or Thing that happens to be where the
PCs are.
61. A Friend has a cranky, temperamental artificial
heart installed, and the doctor who put it in is the
only one who really understands how it works.
The heart has recently started to stutter, but the
doctor has vanished. An Enemy has snatched him
to fit his elite assassins with very unsafe combat
mods.
62. A local clinic is doing wonders in providing free
health care to the poor. In truth, it’s a front for
an offworld eugenics cult, with useful “specimens”
kidnapped and shipped offworld while ’cremated remains’ are given to the family. A Friend is
snatched by them, but the party knows they’d
have never consented to cremation as the clinic
staff claim.
63. Space pirates have cut a deal with an isolated
backwoods settlement, off loading their plunder
to merchants who meet them there. A Friend goes
home to family after a long absence, but is kidnapped or killed before they can bring back word
of the dealings. Meanwhile, the party is entrusted
with a valuable Thing that must be brought to the
Friend quickly.

ADVENTURE SEEDS •189
64. A reclusive psychiatrist is offering treatment for
violent mentally ill patients at a remote Place. His
treatments seem to work, calming the subjects
and returning them to rationality, though major
memory loss is involved and some severe social
clumsiness ensues. In actuality, he’s removed
large portions of their brains to fit them with remote-control units slaved to an AI in his laboratory. He intends to use them as drones to acquire
more “subjects”, and eventual control of the town.
65. Vital medical supplies against an impending plague
have been shipped in from offworld, but the spike
drive craft that was due to deliver them misjumped,
and has arrived in-system as a lifeless wreck transmitting a blind distress signal. Whoever gets there
first can hold the whole planet hostage, and an Enemy means to do just that.
66. A Friend has spent a substantial portion of their
wealth on an ultra-modern new domicile, and invites the party to enjoy a weekend there. An Enemy has hacked the house’s computer system to
trap the inhabitants inside and use the automated
fittings to kill them.
67. A mud slide, hurricane, earthquake, or other form
of disaster strikes a remote settlement. The party
is the closest group of responders, and must rescue
the locals while dealing with the unearthed, malfunctioning pretech Thing that threatens to cause
an even greater calamity if not safely defused.
68. A Friend has found a lost pretech installation, and
needs help to loot it. By planetary law, the contents
belong to the government.
69. An Enemy mistakes the party for the kind of offworlders who will murder innocents for pay- assuming they aren’t that kind, at least. He’s sloppy
with the contact and unwittingly identifies himself,
letting the players know that a Friend will shortly
die unless the Enemy is stopped.
70. A party member is identified as a prophesied savior
for an oppressed faith or ethnicity. The believers
obstinately refuse to believe any protestations to
the contrary, and a cynical Enemy in government
decides the PC must die simply to prevent the risk
of uprising. An equally cynical Friend is determined to push the PC forward as a savior, because
that’s what’s needed.
71. Alien beasts escape from a zoo and run wild
through the spectators. The panicked owner offers
large rewards for recapturing them live, but some
of the beasts are quite dangerous.
72. A trained psychic is accused of going feral by an
Enemy. The psychic had already suffered severe
neural damage before being found for training,
so brain scans cannot establish physical signs of
madness. The psychic seems unstable, but not violent- at least, on short acquaintance. The psychic
offers a psychic PC the secrets of a unique psychic
technique if they help him flee.

73. A Thing is the token of rulership on this world,
and it’s gone missing. If it’s not found rapidly, the
existing ruler will be deposed. Evidence left at a
Place suggests that an Enemy has it, but extralegal
means are necessary to investigate fully.
74. Psychics are vanishing, including a Friend. They’re
being kidnapped by an ostensibly-rogue government researcher who is using them to research the
lost psychic disciplines that helped enable pretech
manufacturing, and they are being held at a remote
Place. The snatcher is a small-time local Enemy
with unnaturally ample resources.
75. A Friend desperately seeks to hide evidence of some
past crime that will ruin his life should it come to
light. An Enemy holds the Thing that proves his
involvement, and blackmails him ruthlessly.
76. A courier mistakes the party for the wrong set of
offworlders, and wordlessly deposits a Thing with
them that implies something awful- med-frozen,
child-sized human organs, for example, or a private catalog of gengineered human slaves. The
courier’s boss shortly realizes the error, and this
Enemy tries to silence the PCs while preserving
the Place where his evil is enacted.
77. A slowboat system freighter is taken over by Enemy separatist terrorists at the same time as the
planet’s space defenses are taken offline by internal
terrorist attacks. The freighter is aimed straight at
the starport, and will crash into it in hours if not
stopped.
78. Alien artifacts on the planet’s surface start beaming
signals into the system’s asteroid belt. The signals
provoke a social Complication in panicked response, and an Enemy seeks to use the confusion
to take over. The actual effect of the signals might
be harmless, or might summon a long-lost alien AI
warship to scourge life from the world.
79. An alien ambassador Friend is targeted by xenophobe Enemy assassins. Relations are so fragile
that if the ambassador even realizes that humans
are making a serious effort to kill him, the result
may be war.
80. A new religion is being preached by a Friend on
this planet. Existing faiths are not amused, and
an Enemy among the hierarchy is provoking the
people to persecute the new believers, hoping for
things to get out of hand.
81. An Enemy was once the patron of a Friend until
the latter was betrayed. Now the Friend wants revenge, and they think they have the information
necessary to get past the Enemy’s defenses.
82. Vital life support or medical equipment has been
sabotaged by offworlders or zealots, and must be
repaired before time runs out. The only possible
source of parts is at a Place, and the saboteurs can
be expected to be working hard to get there and
destroy them, too.

190• ADVENTURE SEEDS
83. A Friend is importing offworld tech that threatens
to completely replace the offerings of an Enemy
businessman. The Enemy seeks to sabotage the
friend’s stock, and thus ’prove’ its inferiority.
84. An Exchange diplomat is negotiating for the opening of a branch of the interstellar bank on this
world. An Enemy among the local banks wants to
show the world as being ungovernably unstable,
so provokes Complications and riots around the
diplomat.
85. An Enemy is infuriated by the uppity presumption
of an ambitious Friend of a lower social caste, and
tries to pin a local Complication on the results of
his unnatural rejection of his proper place.
86. A Friend is working for an offworld corporation
to open a manufactory, and is ignoring local traditions that privilege certain social or ethnic groups,
giving jobs to the most qualified workers instead.
An angry Enemy seeks to sabotage the factory.
87. An offworld musician who was revered as little less
than a god on his homeworld requires bodyguards.
He immediately acquires Enemies on this world
with his riotous ways, and his guards must keep
him from getting arrested if they are to be paid.
88. Atmospheric disturbances, dust storms, or other
particulate clouds suddenly blow into town, leaving the settlement blind. An Enemy commits a
murder during the darkness, and attempts to frame
the players as convenient scapegoats.
89. An Enemy spikes the oxygen supply of an orbital station or unbreathable-atmosphere hab dome
with hallucinogens as cover for a theft. Most victims are merely confused and disoriented, but
some become violent in their delusions. By chance,
the party’s air supply was not contaminated.
90. By coincidence, one of the party members is wearing clothing indicative of membership in a violent
political group, and thus the party is treated in
friendly fashion by a local Enemy for no obvious
reason. The Enemy assumes that the party will go
along with some vicious crime without complaint,
and the group isn’t informed of what’s in the offing
until they’re in deep.
91. A local ruler wishes outworlders to advise him of
the quality of his execrable poetry- and is the sort
to react very poorly to anything less that evidently
sincere and fulsome praise. Failure to amuse the
ruler results in the party being dumped in a dangerous Place to “experience truly poetic solitude”.
92. A Friend among the locals is unreasonably convinced that offworlder tech can repair anything,
and has blithely promised a powerful local Enemy that the party can easily fix a damaged pretech
Thing. The Enemy has invested in many expensive spare parts, but the truly necessary pieces are
kept in a still-dangerous pretech installation in a
remote Place.

93. The party’s offworld comm gear picks up a chance
transmission from the local government and automatically descrambles the primitive encryption
key. The document is proof that an Enemy in government intends to commit an atrocity against a
local village with a group of “deniable” renegades
in order to steal a Thing kept in the village.
94. A Friend belongs to a persecuted faith, ethnicity,
or social class, and appeals for the PCs to help a
cell of rebels get offworld before the Enemy law
enforcement finds them.
95. A part on the party’s ship or the only other transport out has failed, and needs immediate replacement. The only available part is held by an Enemy,
who will only willingly relinquish it in exchange
for a Thing held by an innocent Friend who will
refuse to sell at any price.
96. Eugenics cultists are making gengineered slaves
out of genetic material gathered at a local brothel.
Some of the unnaturally tempting slaves are being
slipped among the prostitutes as bait to infatuate
powerful officials, while others are being sold under the table to less scrupulous elites.
97. Evidence has been unearthed at a Place that substantial portions of the planet are actually owned
by members of an oppressed and persecuted group.
The local courts have no intention of recognizing
the rights, but the codes with the ownership evidence would allow someone to bypass a number
of antique pretech defenses around the planetary
governor’s palace. A Friend wants the codes to pass
to his friends among the group’s rebels.
98. A crop smut threatens the planet’s agriculture,
promising large-scale famine. A Friend finds evidence that a secret government research station
in the system’s asteroid belt was conducting experiments in disease-resistant crop strains for the
planet before the Silence struck and cut off communication with the station. The existing government considers it a wild goose chase, but the party
might choose to help. The station has stasis-frozen
samples of the crop sufficient to avert the famine,
but it also has less pleasant relics….
99. A grasping Enemy in local government seizes the
party’s ship for some trifling offense. The Enemy
wants to end offworld trade, and is trying to scare
other traders away. The starship is held within a
military cordon, and the Enemy is confident that
by the time other elements of the government
countermand the order, the free traders will have
been spooked off.
100.A seemingly useless trinket purchased by a PC
turns out to be the security key to a lost pretech
facility. It was sold by accident by a bungling and
now-dead minion of a local Enemy, who is hot after the party to “reclaim” his property… preferably
after the party defeats whatever automatic defenses and bots the facility might still support.

AN EXAMPLE OF ADVENTURE CREATION •191

AN EXAMPLE OF ADVENTURE CREATION
The GM has just started a new campaign, and he needs
to brew up an initial adventure to pull the party together and get them accustomed to the sector he’s just
created. He knows what planet the PCs are going to
begin on and he knows he wants them to end up owning a battered free merchant starship by the end of the
session, but the rest is still up in the air.
He starts by deciding whether or not to use an adventure seed. While he sees a few that might work, he
decides instead to roll up this adventure from scratch.
The world he’s created is a planet known to its
natives as Delaine, with the world tags “Alien Ruins”
and “Xenophobes”. The Delainers have numerous unexplored alien ruins on their world, but fear them as
potential sources of catastrophe. They hate outsiders
because the offworlders are constantly prodding at the
ruins and trying to loot them, and care nothing for the
disasters they might unleash on the locals.
The GM knows that his first batch of PCs are very
unlikely to all be Delainers, so he decides that they were
all passengers on a smuggler ship that tried to land on
Delaine and loot one of the ruins. The Delainer defense
grid spotted the ship and knocked it down, however,
and the PCs were among the few survivors. Maybe the
PCs were initially part of the smuggler crew, or maybe they were just oblivious passengers. The GM will
let each player decide what their PC’s role was during
character creation.
The first step is to pick a Problem for the PCs to
get involved in. On the face of it, the obvious Problem
for the PCs is that they’re marooned on a hostile world
and need to get off before the natives find them and
either kill or imprison them.
The GM wants something a little more specific
than this, however. He rolls some dice on the Conflict
table, and comes up with “Ethnicity” for the Conflict,
with “Two groups that hate each other” and “Official
ethnic ghettos”. Given Delaine’s history, the GM decides that any non-native Delainers present when the
world shut down its contact with other planets were
separated out into remote ethnic reservations, far away
from the ruins. These “offworlders” have been here for
generations but are despised by the native Delainers.
With that established, the GM decides that the
PC’s ship was shot down near one of these reservations,
and the bitter offworlders are interested in helping people whom the Delainers hate. But who will the initial
Person the PCs contact be?
The dice paint the picture of an offworlder motivated to redeem themselves from a prior failure,
who wants to find proof of a rival NPC’s malfeasance,
who knows where significant wealth is to be found,
and wears a particularly odd style of dress. From this,
the GM creates “the Captain”, a former ruin smuggler
whose crew was gunned down while trying to loot an

alien ruin. Only he survived, and his guilt is intense.
He still wears a nautical captain’s hat, and is hiding out
among the offworlders. He knows where he’s hidden
his ship and can guide the PCs to it if they can make
the dangerous overland journey.
The GM isn’t so certain about the Captain’s want,
however. While something like that would make a
good sideline for a longer adventure, he wants this
initial adventuring session to be relatively short and
straightforward. He replaces the want with the Captain’s desire for the PCs to get him and his young offworlder wife off the planet, bringing them to just about
any place that isn’t on Delaine. He’s willing to give the
PCs his ship if they just help him get away.
Why hasn’t the Captain snuck off with his young
bride yet? To answer that question, the GM turns to
the Places section and rolls up a hazard. The result is
“Sentient”, which means that there’s an intelligent enemy between the Captain and the ship. The GM mulls
over the possibilities for a while, and decides the Captain wasn’t the only survivor. His first mate made it out
too, and blames the Captain. He’s gathered together a
small band of offworlder rebels and is seeking to loot
ruins and harm Delainers, because he can’t operate the
ship without the Captain’s security codes and he’s not
sufficiently talented to hack the locks himself.
At this point, the GM looks at the adventure and
identifies the bits he needs to flesh out. He needs to
detail the Captain, the first mate, the offworlder rebels,
and the Delainer security chief who will seek to apprehend the PCs if they’re not sufficiently stealthy. All of
these people will need combat stats. The Captain’s wife,
the offworlder reservation locals, and other bit NPCs
are unlikely to get into a fight, and don’t need stats.
The GM decides he doesn’t need a map for the
offworlder reservation settlement, but he does need
a map of the terrain between the settlement and the
hidden ship. He downloads a suitable terrain map from
the web for that. On the map, he plants a few Wilderness Ongoings from the Places table that the PCs may
or may not encounter depending on how they chart
their course.
The last detail to flesh out is the first mate’s rebel
camp, and how the PCs might get at the starship they’re
guarding. The GM decides that it’s not reasonable for
the first mate to have accumulated a vast number of
minions, but there are too many for the PCs to comfortably engage. The PCs will have to think of some
way to distract them, or possibly sic the Delainer security chief on them before they can get to the ship. It’s
not the GM’s job to hand them a solution, so they’ll
have to puzzle it out on their own.
With that done, the starting adventure is ready.
The GM might add some more details and fluff, but
what he has is a playable start to a campaign.

