274• HEROIC CHARACTERS

HEROIC CHARACTERS
The default tone of Stars Without Number is that of
gritty sci-fi. PCs are capable and talented men and
women, but they are most emphatically mortal. They
fail even when it’s critical that they succeed, they die
when people shoot them, and they have no particular
narrative armor against the horrors of an uncaring
galaxy. Even the most experienced PC is subject to the
limits of normal human capabilities.
Not every group cares for that tone. Sometimes
the players will want something more space-operatic
in flavor, with heroes sporting the skill and prowess of
action heroes and legendary icons in the making. Other
groups will want to use Stars Without Number for particular settings or worlds where the PCs are just better than the rank and file of common humanity, more
capable or more gifted. Some GMs might just want to
run a one-on-one campaign with a friend or family
member, ushering a single shining hero through their
own personal arc of adventure.
For these groups, a heroic campaign is an option.
In such a campaign, the PCs are a very distinct cut
above the ordinary run of stellar adventurers. Even
fresh from character creation, they can knock down
ordinary foes and overcome challenges that would
leave an experienced normal PC sweating. Of course, in
such heroic campaigns, such talent is often a requisite
for bare survival, as the dangers these heroes face are
often far more dramatic than those essayed by ordinary
humanity.
It should be a mutual group decision to play a heroic campaign. Not every GM will want to run one, and
not every player will want to play in one. Even so, if
everyone involved is on board with the idea, the guidelines below will show you how to forge these brilliant
starfarers and challenge them with fitting perils.

Creating a Heroic PC

When building a budding hero of interstellar legend,
the usual rules for character creation are followed, with
the changes listed below.
•

To get their attribute scores, Heroic PCs roll 4d6
six times, dropping the lowest die each time and
assigning the six scores as desired. If none of the
scores are 18, one roll may be replaced with an
18. If the player would rather assign an array to
their attributes instead of risking the dice, they
may place the following rolls as they wish: 18, 14,
13, 12, 10, 9.

•

Heroic character classes are similar to their normal versions, but have additional benefits. The
changes to each class are listed below.

•

Heroic PCs have half the maximum possible hit
points for their class, level, and Constitution
modifier, rounded up Thus, if a 3rd level Warrior
could theoretically have 24 hit points at most, a
Heroic Warrior of that level has 12 hit points. A
first level Heroic Arcanist with Constitution 13
who could have at most 5 hit points would have 3.

•

Heroic PCs get the usual number of foci at first
level, but they can pick a new focus at every
even-numbered character level instead of the
usual progression.

Unless noted above, Heroic PCs follow all the usual
rules and guidelines for creating characters, gaining
experience, and advancing in character level.

HEROIC CHARACTERS •275

HEROIC CHARACTER CLASSES
Heroic PCs follow the same class categories as their
more human peers, but their abilities are even more
pronounced. For instance, a Heroic Warrior has the
same hit point bonus and extra combat focus of an ordinary Warrior, but he also has a lethally unerring eye
against common foes and a reaction speed that ensures
he beats any normal opponent to the draw.
A player should pick a Heroic class for their newly-forged hero when they come to that stage of character creation. The details given below describe how
these classes vary from the normal form, in addition
to details on the optional arcane classes in this book.

Heroic Adventurers

As the normal Adventurer class, but a Heroic Adventurer can take three partial classes, or one full normal
class and one partial class. Thus, they might choose to
be a normal Warrior and a Partial Expert, or a normal
Psychic and a Partial Arcanist, or a three-way Partial
Warrior-Expert-Psychic.

Heroic Experts

As the normal Expert class, but once per scene, the PC
can treat any non-combat, non-psychic skill check related to their background or concept as if they rolled
a natural 12. They may choose to use this ability after
rolling the dice. Experts and Partial Experts roll 1d6
for their Fray die.

Heroic Psychics

As the normal Psychic class, but Heroic Psychics have
one bonus point of maximum Effort, gain one extra
skill point to be spent on psychic skills and techniques
each time they advance a character level, and can pick
four psychic disciplines as bonus skills at first level instead of two. As usual, no single psychic skill can start
higher than level-1 during character creation. Psychics
and Partial Psychics roll 1d4 for their Fray die, but can
apply it to any enemy, and not just lesser foes.

Heroic Warriors

As the normal Warrior class, but their attack rolls always hit lesser foes, those enemies with equal or fewer
hit dice than the PC has character levels. Heroic Warriors always win initiative in combat unless surprised
or facing other Heroic Warriors. In the latter case, both
roll normally and act before other combatants. Warriors and Partial Warriors roll 1d8 for their Fray die.

These class descriptions include mention of a Fray
Die, which is fully explained on the following page. If a
Heroic Adventurer has multiple Fray Die options, they
can pick one to use on any given combat round.
As usual, most NPCs do not have a character class,
and they most certainly do not have a Heroic character
class. A soldier is just a soldier, he is not a Warrior. In
some exceptional cases the GM might give class abilities to a particular NPC, but truly dangerous foes are
more likely to be built with the Nemesis rules later in
this section, the better to portray the dark and terrible
foes appropriate to a space-operatic tale.

Heroic Arcanists

As the normal Arcanist class, but gain one extra spell
preparation slot for every level you are capable of casting. In addition, gain bonus slots equal to your character level; you can use these bonus slots to cast any
spell you know, whether or not you’ve prepared the
spell and regardless of the spell’s level. If used to fuel
abilities that require burning spell slots, treat them as
slots of the highest level the Arcanist can cast. Arcanists
and Partial Arcanists roll 1d4 for their Fray die, but can
apply it to any enemy, and not just lesser foes.

Heroic Magisters

As the normal Magister class, but you learn one extra
spell per level you are capable of casting. In addition,
choose one spell from every level you are capable of
casting; you may cast these chosen spells as often as
you wish, though you can’t use them to fuel foci or
abilities that require you to burn spell slots. You can
change which spells you nominate for free casting with
a day’s work. Magisters and Partial Magisters roll 1d4
for their Fray die, but can apply it to any enemy, and
not just lesser foes.

Heroic Adepts

Because an Adept class tends to have so many unique
and specific powers, it’s not possible to provide a single
easy template for scaling it upwards. Some GMs will
be able to boost a given Adept class relatively easily,
giving it additional abilities or giving them access to
higher-level powers at a lower PC level. Other Adept
classes are resistant to such changes. In most cases, the
simplest solution is to let such a PC be a Heroic Adventurer, taking the full normal Adept class and then a
partial class appropriate to their general concept. If the
Adept’s magical abilities are mainly combat-oriented,
their Fray die is 1d6. If the Adept’s abilities are less
martially-focused, their Fray die is 1d4. In both cases,
they can apply the damage to any target, and not only
those who are lesser foes.

276• HEROIC COMBAT

HEROIC COMBAT
When the greatest warriors in the sector clash, common mortals fare poorly. Heroic combat shares almost
all of the same mechanics and rules as normal combat,
but it is very different in two important respects: the
way damage is calculated and applied, and the existence
of the Fray Die.

Counting Heroic Damage

When damage dice are rolled in a Heroic campaign,
they are not read straight. Instead, each die is compared
to the table below and that much damage is done. If the
roll has a bonus, the bonus is applied only to the highest
single die in the roll.
Damage Die Roll
1

Damage Inflicted
No Damage

2–5

1 point

6–9

2 points

10+

4 points

Thus, if a 2d8+2 mag rifle hit rolled a 5 and a 2,
the roll would count as 7 and 2, inflicting a total of 3
points of damage. If a space wizard hurled a sphere of
explosive thermal energy at a group that did 8d6 damage, each die would be counted, resulting in potentially
0 to 16 points of damage.
PCs subtract this hit point damage from their total
as normal. NPCs, however, subtract it from their hit
dice. Thus, that mag rifle hit would instantly drop a
3 HD veteran soldier. Normal NPCs do not have hit
points; they only count their hit dice. Special “Nemesis” NPCs may have hit points and may be substantially
harder to bring down.
Damage in excess of that needed to drop a target
can be spread as overflow to any other target the initial
attack roll could have hit. For example, if that mag rifle
shot was enough to hit AC 16, it could bring down not

Why the Table?
Why use the conversion table instead of just dividing damage by three or some other formula?
Wouldn’t that be simpler?
Stars Without Number is built to interface
well with a wide range of other old-school games,
many of which involve enemies that roll large
damage dice or that have large bonuses to damage
rolls. Using the table evens out these variances;
a foe that does 1d20 damage and a foe that does
1d12+4 damage both work out to “a really big
hit”, while there is still a meaningful difference
between a 1d4 knife and a 1d8 bullet.

only the first 1 HD thug it hit, but the next two thugs as
well, provided none of them had an AC better than 16.
If the damage is area-effect in nature, it does not
overflow. Each victim in range suffers the rolled damage. A grenade that inflicts 2 points of damage on its
victims would wipe out any normal soldiers in range,
but the excess would not be inflicted on any unlucky
veterans among them.
If the damage done is fixed for some reason, such
as a hazard or a power that always does 10 points of
damage, one point is inflicted for every 4 original
points of damage, rounded down.

Healing Heroic Damage

Any healing effects, whether from stims or biopsionics,
are rolled on the damage table and applied accordingly.
Thus, a healing stim that would normally heal 1d6+2
damage will instead heal anywhere from 1 to 2 points
of heroic damage.

Lesser Foes and Worthy Foes

Some abilities distinguish between “lesser foes” and
“worthy foes”. The former is any NPC target with hit
dice equal or lesser than the actor’s character level or
hit dice, while the latter is any target with more hit
dice than the actor has levels or hit dice. Heroic PCs
are never lesser foes, regardless of their level.

The Fray Die

A Heroic PC is dangerous. Even the most pacifistic
character is capable of besting ordinary foes when
forced to it, and veteran combatants can take out half
an alien bar without spilling their beer. The general
halo of violence that Heroic PCs emanate is expressed
in their Fray Die. This die represents the casual blows,
snap shots, passing backhands, and quick psychic bursts
that a Heroic PC employs even when their attention is
focused on something else.
Once every round, as an On Turn action, the PC
may roll their Fray Die and apply the damage to any
single lesser foe within range of their weapons, fists, or
abilities. For psychic powers and casual magical abilities, the usual effective range is out to thirty meters. If
the damage is more than enough to drop the target, the
overflow is applied normally to another valid target.
A PC’s Fray Die can normally only be applied to
lesser foes, as serious opponents are too skilled and
dangerous to be dispatched so easily. Classes that use
psychic or supernatural powers, however, can apply
their Fray Die even to worthy foes, as their abilities
are less susceptible to being countered.
Ranged weapons that use ammunition don’t expend any in the course of making a Fray Die attack. The
blaze of gunfire is just part of the general scene, and
unless the gun is actually out of ammo, it can be used.

HEROIC COMBAT •277
Fray Dice are not modified by bonuses or penalties.
A Heroic Warrior with a 1d8 Fray Die always rolls 1d8,
regardless of their skills or attributes.

Focused Fray

As an option, a hero who is particularly determined to
harm a target can use their Main Action to inflict their
Fray Die damage on the enemy, whether or not it is a
lesser foe. A PC who chooses to use a Focused Fray in
a round cannot use their Fray Die in the normal way.
This option exists for those players who wish to
avoid the potential frustration of a missed hit roll and
are willing to accept the lesser damage of a Fray Die.

No Shock Damage

Shock damage rarely fits the idiom of heroic adventure,
so it is ignored for these campaigns.

DEFYING DOOM
Sometimes a hero is in a dire situation, one that seems
certain to spell the end of their adventure. Maybe
they’ve found themselves plummeting off the edge of
a floating sky-city, or locked in a chamber that can only
be unsealed by a particular species of alien, or confronted with a mission-critical text that can only be read by
someone with skills they don’t possess. In such situations, they may choose to Defy Doom.
To Defy Doom, the PC takes 1d4 damage per
character level they possess, rolling the damage and
applying it immediately. If the harm reduces them to
zero hit points, they are instead left at one hit point and
prey to the full horror of the situation. If the damage
fails to reduce them to zero hit points, they somehow
survive or bypass their peril. They can suggest a twist
in the plot if they wish, or the GM can simply narrate
their amazing stroke of luck or skill.
Pushing their luck this way comes at a price. The
damage inflicted by Defying Doom cannot be healed
until the adventure is over, and every time the PC Defies Doom in the same adventure, the size of the die
they roll increases by one step. Thus, the second time
they Defy Doom, they roll 1d6 per character level. The
third time, 1d8, and so forth until the truly unlucky PC
is rolling 1d20 each time. The die size does not reset
until the adventure concludes or the PC abandons it.
Defying Doom is a mechanic that works particularly well for single-PC gaming, with just the GM and
one player. Adventures often assume a band of PCs
with a wide range of abilities, and a solo hero can have a
hard time handling challenges that fall far outside their
concept. If playing in a full group the GM may choose
to disallow Defying Doom, as a band of Heroic PCs
really ought to have all the skills they need for dealing
with the situations they encounter. A Defied Doom
that saves a whole party should inflict damage on all.

Heroic PCs Auto-Stabilize

If reduced to zero hit points by a theoretically-survivable injury, Heroic PCs always automatically stabilize. If
hurt again, however, they die as usual unless the group
has agreed on different rules for PC mortality.

Vehicle and Starship Damage

Damage is rolled and inflicted normally for vehicular
and starship combat, rather than referring to the table.
In the case that PCs or NPCs are shooting at a vehicle,
they roll their damage dice normally, apply the vehicle’s
Armor, and subtract the result from the vehicle’s hit
points. If a vehicle shoots at PCs or NPCs, the damage
uses the table before being subtracted from the target
PC’s hit points or target NPC’s hit dice. A starship-sized
weapon shooting at human-sized targets is something
that usually leaves only a rapidly-expanding gas cloud.

Solo Heroes
A Heroic PC is roughly equal to four ordinary PCs
of the same level when it comes to overcoming
challenges and dealing with foes in combat. It’s
quite possible to run an adventure originally designed for an entire party with just a single level-appropriate Heroic PC.
As a consequence, some GMs might enjoy
running solo campaigns for a particular friend,
spouse, child, or newbie to the hobby. Using a
Heroic PC can help the player get through events
and situations that might summarily dispose of a
single ordinary character.
GMs who do run solo campaigns are encouraged to keep rules like Defying Doom in mind, as
there may be a number of situations where the
hero lacks some crucial skill or is beset by some
otherwise-inescapable difficulty. Repeated use
of Defying Doom will wear the hero down until
failure is inevitable, but judicious invocation can
carry a hero through considerable lethal peril.
GMs who run solo games should also be prepared for things to move much, much faster than
at a conventional table. With only one player to
make decisions, choices come much more rapidly
and events can veer much farther away from the
expected baseline. A group will tend to correct for
its most outlying impulses, with people moderating their choices so as to complement their fellow
players. With only one PC, there’s no such thing.
Be ready to take the campaign in completely new
directions should your player decide that some
new goal is more enticing or some new place
more interesting to explore. While this can be a
challenge to GMs, it’s also much easier to satisfy
the play goals of only one player at a time.

278• CHALLENGING HEROIC PCS

CHALLENGING HEROIC PCS
As a GM, your basic toolbox for challenging PCs doesn’t
need too much of an overhaul to handle Heroic PCs.
The key thing to keep in mind is to make sure the group
has a goal worthy of its prowess. A group of Heroic PCs
is the sort of band to bring down a sector hegemon or
win an age-old war against an implacable alien foe. If
the group’s ambition doesn’t fit well as a tag line on a
space opera, they may be thinking too small.
Aside from that, however, there are a few common
classes of challenges that bear special mention.

Social Challenges

Heroic Experts with a social-oriented concept are going
to cut through most social challenges in a hurry. If their
native skills and foci don’t do it, their Heroic Expert
class skill will. When such a PC breaks out their class
ability, let them win if it’s at all plausible. They may not
get everything they want, and what they get may come
with unpleasant complications, but they should never
feel like they’ve wasted their effort when they employ
their special abilities.
The key with social challenges is to think past
the immediate situation. All right, so the Expert has
the Chatelaine of the High Port eating out of his hand.
She’ll gladly support the party’s expedition to the radioactive surface below the space station. The Chatelaine
obviously has enemies, however, and there are doubtless all manner of people upset and troubled at this turn
of events. The PC can’t charm or bamboozle them all,
and the deeper he insinuates himself into local affairs,
the more enemies and potential allies he’s going to encounter. It’s all right for the PC to “win” the situation,
because there is always another situation behind it.

Investigative Challenges

Heroic PCs have the tools to beat a lot of mysteries,
and if the Defying Doom rule is used, they might even
be able to pull meaning out of an impenetrable clue if
it’s necessary to advance their goals. When you build
mystery-based adventures for them, plan on the secret
being learned rapidly, and make the it more about the
consequences of the discovery or proving it to others.

Combat Challenges

Heroic PCs are going to mow through ordinary thugs
and goons, especially if they have a Heroic Warrior
among them. Large groups of enemies can still be a
serious threat to the party, but one-on-one, common
humans have almost no chance of winning a fight with
the group. The simple existence of the Fray Die means
that the group is going to take out its weight in 1 HD
mooks every round, plus whoever they actually deign
to shoot personally. Even when the opposition is a real
threat, heroic damage scaling ensures that the PCs can
survive a few hits even at first level.

As a consequence, most GMs will have a strong
urge to throw major enemies at the group in combat;
titans of war and legions of veteran soldiers, all to make
the PCs genuinely sweat. To some extent, this is an
appropriate part of the genre; space operas usually do
have a large supply of more-than-human warriors. A
GM should be careful, however, to make sure that these
martial perils are logical and appropriate to the setting.
If you’ve established that the city-state of Quar is policed by genetically-enhanced enforcers, then throwing
a squad of 3 hit die street cops at the heroes is perfectly
logical. If these grizzled veterans pop up only because
the PCs had too easy a time busting the heads of the
locals two planets away, however, it becomes more
difficult to justify.

Nemesis Foes

Some enemies are special. Even the mightiest normal
human is unlikely to have more than 10 hit dice and
will be apt to fall swiftly under the guns of a party of
heroes. For true challenges and the sort of dark perils
that befit a heroic campaign, the GM can use Nemeses.
A Nemesis is built just like an ordinary NPC or
alien creature, but has a few modifications made to its
usual baseline combat statistics.
First, a Nemesis has hit points equal to its hit dice
times four. The damage it takes is subtracted from
these hit points, not hit dice. A grizzled veteran with 3
HD, for example, would have 12 hit points as a Nemesis.
Second, all the damage a Nemesis inflicts is read
straight, without conversion through the table. If that
Nemesis veteran shoots a PC with a 1d8 revolver, the
PC takes 1d8 hit points of damage straight.
Third, the Nemesis has a Fray Die, usually 1d8,
though perhaps even higher or somewhat lower. This
damage affects PCs and is inflicted straight. Thus, the
Nemesis above could do automatically do 1d8 damage
each round to a single PC within range.
Fourth, all Nemeses get a +4 bonus to hit rolls.
A Nemesis does not have to be a high hit die foe.
Even an ordinary trooper can be a Nemesis if they have
some special significance, and you shouldn’t feel obligated to make every Nemesis a 10 hit die, 40 hit point
beast. Any adventure-significant foe could be a valid
Nemesis, so long as they have importance to the party.
A single Nemesis will usually defeat any PC with
the same level as the Nemesis’ hit dice, though a Warrior can sometimes pull out a victory against a low-level
Nemesis with few hit points. They will probably defeat any two PCs of that level, and they will present a
significant but probably-beatable challenge to groups
of three or more same-level PCs. If the Nemesis has
multiple attacks per round, such as with an alien beast
or superlatively-skilled warrior, they’ll likely overcome
one more PC for every additional attack they get.

+
+
+
+
+

Name
Mods

Name
Mods

Name
Mods

Name
Mods

AC

AC

AC

Name
Mods

Name
Mods

Total Atk Bonus

Name
Mods

Armor

XP
Damage Roll Damage Done
1 or less
No Damage
2 to 5
1 point
6 to 9
2 point s
10 or more
4 point s

Range and Ammo

Level

Class

Background

Name
Mods

Weapons

Species

Employer

Homeworld

Name

Stars Without Number

Credits

Readied Items

Foci

Base Atk Bonus

+

Debts

Work
Biopsionics
Metapsionics
Precognition
Telekinesis
Telepathy
Teleportation

Max Enc = STR ÷ 2

Lvl

Lvl

Lvl

Lvl

Lvl

Lvl

+1 Focus at lvl 2, lvl 4, lvl 6, lvl 8 & lvl 10

Fray Die

Max: +2 at lvl 3 | +3 at lvl 6 | +4 at lvl 9

Warrior = +Lvl | Other = +(Lvl ÷ 2)
Partial Warrior = +1 at lvl 1 & lvl 5

Cost: new value + 1

Pilot
Program
Punch
Shoot
Sneak
Stab
Sur vive
Talk
Trade

+3sp per lvl (Experts: +1 bonus non-combat)

Administer
Connect
Exert
Fix
Heal
Know
Lead
Notice
Perform

Max:

Evasion

Mental

Max = CON

Permanent:

Psionic Effort

Psionic Techniques

Attributes

WIS

CON

Max:

Boosts: 1st: 1sp (lvl 1) | 2nd: 2sp (lvl 1)
3rd: 3sp (lvl 3) | 4th: 4sp (lvl 6) | 5th: 5sp (lvl 9)

CHA

INT

DEX

STR

3 (-2) | 4-7 (-1) | 8-13 (+0) | 14-17 (+1) | 18 (+2)

Effort: 1 + Highest Psychic Skill + Highest of Wis or Con

+1 on new Psychic Skill Lvl

Cybernetics / Innate Abilities

16 - lvl - [Str | Con] 16 - lvl - [Dex | Int] 16 - lvl -[Wis | Cha]

Saves
Physical

System Strain

Maximum is half the normal maximum HP for class and level

Hitpoints / Conditions

Character Sheet

