266• SPACE MAGIC

SPACE MAGIC
Any reader of this game is likely aware of dozens of
other old-school game systems that have magic-using
character classes and a wealth of arcane sorcery. While
many groups will be perfectly happy to stick with traditional sci-fi tropes, some groups prefer a little more
wizardry in their stellar endeavors, and so this section
provides you with guidelines for integrating existing
old-school spells and magic use into a Stars Without
Number campaign.
Particularly adventurous groups might go so far
as to use Stars Without Number as the chassis for a
straight-up fantasy game, using the Warrior and Expert classes to represent doughty fighters and cunning
thieves, and the additional classes in this section serving as more sorcerously-inclined heroes.

Molding Your Magic

The first step in including these rules is for the GM to
decide just what kind of magic she wants to include in
her campaign. She might decide to simply include the
magic-user and cleric spell lists from Labyrinth Lord,
or import only the magic-user spells from Lamentations of the Flame Princess, or perhaps devise a race of
sense-warping aliens who use the illusionist spell lists
from an early edition of one of TSR’s famed games.
Particularly industrious or inspired GMs might choose
spells from half a dozen different sources and compile
them all into a particular list suitable for their game.
A cursory examination of these other OSR games
will show that almost all of them divide their spells into
multiple “levels” of increasing power, usually ranging
from level 1 to level 9. As a general rule of thumb, you
probably don’t want to include spells higher than level
5 in your campaign. Beyond that power level, magically-gifted PCs start to have a degree of personal prowess
that’s drastically out of scale with non-arcane heroes. It
may be possible to enact these mighty enchantments
through complex rituals, advanced supporting technology, or other roundabout means, but they should
not normally be powers at the ready disposal of PCs.
When you’re picking spells for your campaign,
your main focus should be on your personal group of
players. It’s not necessary to imagine every possible
sub-variety of sorcery in your personal cosmos, or to
spend hours painstakingly crafting a dozen different
schools of magical adepts. It probably isn’t even necessary to worry about the spell lists beyond level 2 or 3.
Your job is to make sure that the magic fits with your
campaign and provides options that are likely to interest your players. Don’t hesitate to straight-out ask your
group if anyone wants to play a magically-gifted hero,
and if so, the kind of magic they’d be most interested in
having. If you give yourself some warning time, you’ll
have enough leisure to put together a basic arcane class
or two that fits your group’s needs.

Start by creating one or more spell lists for the
classes provided in this section. The Arcanist class
should have a single broad spell list that its practitioners all draw from, while the Magister class might
have multiple spell lists for different magical traditions.
A Magister can draw from only one of these lists, representing the particular tradition they belong to. If you
want to save yourself effort, you might make up several
Magister spell lists and then just declare that an Arcanist can learn spells from any of them.
Adepts are a special case, and are meant to represent magical traditions that focus on personal empowerment and alteration. Most often, you’ll simply
be taking an old-school class with multiple intrinsic
magical powers and stripping it for parts to customize
your own Adept classes.

The Magic Skill

In campaigns where sorcery is a matter of general concern, a new skill is added to the list. Magic is the skill
related to both academic and practical use of sorcery.
Whenever a spellcaster attempts to puzzle out some
arcane mystery or use their spells in a way that seems
both plausible and risky, a Magic skill check can be
required. Intelligence is the attribute that usually modifies such a roll, though almost any attribute might be
used for certain situations or magical traditions.
For spells that require a hit roll to connect, the
caster may use their Magic skill as their combat skill,
usually adding their Intelligence or Dexterity modifier
as well depending on whether the attack relies more on
careful targeting or nimble hands.
Whenever a PC rolls or picks the Know skill as
part of their background, focus bonus skills, or other
picks, they may instead choose the Magic skill. A PC
does not have to have magical abilities to understand
the theory and technical details of sorcery, though their
ability to employ their knowledge might be limited.
In some campaigns, GMs will prefer to split the
Magic skill up even further, perhaps giving specific
skills to each Magister school, or dividing different
magical traditions into different skills. While this is
a feasible choice, a GM should be careful not to parse
things too finely, and should allow cross-skill use in
most magical situations.
Importantly, a spellcaster cannot cast a spell of a
level higher than their Magic skill plus one, even if
their character level would normally allow them to
cast such potent enchantments. A magic-user needs to
understand the basic theory and practice of their magic
before they can employ it effectively. This limit does
not apply to Adepts, who often have no magical education at all, and it may also not apply to other magical
traditions that owe more to lineage or random genius
than focused education.

SPACE MAGIC •267

Spells and Invocations

The Arcanist and Magister classes listed below cast
spells. A GM can pick appropriate spells for their lists
from their old-school games of choice, with the Arcanist intended to be a generalist magic-user who can alter
their prepared spells to meet an anticipated situation,
and the Magister meant to be a student of a particular magical tradition that grants them less breadth but
an easier time accessing the full scope of their powers.
For these classes you can lift spells directly from your
sources to make their spell lists, and you usually don’t
have to change anything about the spells.
The Adept class, on the other hand, is meant to
emulate a particular type of magical adept who has a
very restricted range of abilities that are very easy for
them to invoke. Invocations emulate intrinsic magical
powers and special gifts that can’t be effectively interrupted and require no special preparation to employ.
The easiest way to create an Adept’s invocations
is to just look at an existing old-school character class
with intrinsic magical abilities. They’ll usually get special powers at certain levels, or boosted attack damage,
or some other natural class ability. Each of those can be
treated as an invocation. Powers that require activation
should be assigned an action type, either Main Action,
On Turn, or Instant depending on how long it seems
it should take to activate the ability, while flat bonuses
should be invocations that are constantly in effect.
You’re inevitably going to have to eyeball the final
result a little and apply tweaks and adjustments to make
sure the resultant Adept tradition is a suitable fit to
your campaign. Just work with the player who’s going
to have the PC to make something acceptable, as you
don’t have to balance things for random other people.

Casting Magic

In science-fantasy campaigns, magic is divided between
spells and invocations. Spells are arcane formulae, divine
prayers, lengthy rituals, and all other magic-creating
procedures that tend to take some time and undisturbed action in order to trigger. Invocations are innate powers or gifts, either gained through long practice, granted via occult pacts, or simply intrinsic to the
bloodline of the bearer. Invocations require much less
effort to trigger, but their bearers tend to be much less
flexible in their powers than spellcasters.
To cast a spell, the spellcaster must declare their intent to cast a spell at the very start of the round, before
any group has acted, and they must specify which spell
they intend to cast. Their efforts to begin casting will
begin immediately. Most spellcasting is blatantly obvious, involving arcane gestures, stentorian incantations,
and occasional visible discharges of coalescing energy.
Most combatants in a culture where magic exists will
recognize spellcasting immediately, though it is usually impossible to tell what spell the spellcaster is trying
to cast. A magic-user cannot normally cast any spells
if their hands are restrained or their mouth is gagged.

Completing the spell requires a Main Action from
the caster, performed during their normal turn of action during the round. They may choose details of targeting and specific effects at the moment they cast they
spell. If they decide that they really don’t want to cast
the spell after all, they lose their Main Action but will
not waste the spell or the power used to fuel it. If the
caster suffers so much as a single hit point of damage
before they can complete the spell, however, it and
their Main Action for the turn are both lost. The spell
still counts against any casting maximums for the day,
but it fizzles away uselessly.
Invocations are much quicker and easier to cast
than spells, and largely impossible to interrupt. Most
invocations require a Main Action to cast, but they do
not require announcement at the start of the turn and
they cannot be interrupted by damage. Other invocations can be used as an Instant or On Turn action, or
they might be constantly in effect once acquired.

Learning Spells and Invocations

Most spells require either a teacher or a magically-charged instruction device in order to impart its
secrets. A mere text file might be able to describe what
a spell does, but without a magically-imbued training
object for a spellcaster to study, the spell’s true patterns of energy and meaning are impossible to discern.
Traditionally, these training objects take the shape of
physical books, often called “grimoires”, as the traditional methods of energy imprinting commonly focus
on written codices.
Without a grimoire or a willing teacher, a spellcaster cannot learn or use a given spell, even if it appears on the spell list for their class. If the spell does not
appear on their class spell list, they cannot learn it even
with access to a teacher or grimoire. It simply is too far
outside the scope of their magical education.
Learning a spell from a teacher requires one day
per level of the spell. Learning it from a magically-imbued object requires one week per spell level. This
training can be interrupted and resumed with no ill
effects, but a spellcaster can learn only one spell at a
time. Most Magisters can expect to be taught the spells
of their tradition by a cooperative senior member of
their order as they advance in level, though they might
be called upon to perform a service for the tradition in
order to “prove their worthiness” to receive the knowledge. Arcanists have a less certain path forward, and
must usually either find grimoires or convince other
spellcasters to train them, often for a substantial fee in
credits or service. In the absence of some other requirement, and assuming a willing teacher can be found,
such tutoring usually costs five hundred credits for a
first level spell, doubled for each ensuing spell level.
Only Arcanists and Magisters can learn spells. Adepts are taught their invocations as part of their training and gradual maturation, and gain their abilities
automatically as they advance in experience.

268• THE ARCANIST

THE ARCANIST
A purveyor of mystical secrets and a relentless scholar
of the unknown, the Arcanist is meant to represent
a magic-user with a broad grasp of arcane principles
and a catholic view toward magical theory. Arcanists
sometimes form groups of like-minded researchers, but
their individuality and idiosyncratic academic views often makes it difficult for them to work closely together.

Arcanist Spellcasting

Arcanists all share the same spell list. At first level, they
may pick a number of first level spells from this list
equal to two plus their Intelligence modifier. They begin knowing these spells and may prepare their allowed
spells per day from them. They may learn new spells as
the opportunity arises, but they cannot learn a spell that
is not on the Arcanist list or that is a higher level than
they can actually cast. There is no limit to the number
of spells an Arcanist can learn save for the need to find
a teacher or grimoire from which to learn them.
An Arcanist must prepare their spells before casting them. Such preparation requires an hour of undisturbed meditation, arcane exercises, and calculation,
and can only be done once per day. The number of
spells an Arcanist can have prepared at any one time
depends on their character level; a novice Arcanist can
prepare only a single first level spell, while a master can
have a dozen different incantations ready for use. The
adjacent table lists the number of spells of each level
that the Arcanist can prepare each day.
An Arcanist may fill a higher-level slot with a lower-level spell if they wish, such as using a second level
spell slot to prepare a first level spell. Arcanists may
also prepare multiple “copies” of a spell they expect to
see heavy use, preparing the same spell multiple times
in multiple slots.
When an Arcanist casts a spell, it is discharged and
must be prepared again before it can be used again. If
they have multiple copies of a spell prepared, they can
continue to use it until they run dry of available incantations. Suffering hit point damage before they can
successfully complete casting a spell also costs them the
spell, as it fizzles uselessly and is lost for the day.

Arcanist Class Abilities

Arcanists spend so much time in scholarly study that
they lack the resilience of more active heroes. Their hit
points are rolled as 1d6-1 each level, plus their Constitution modifier. Each die’s total cannot be less than 1,
even with the penalty.
Arcanists spend very little time mastering mundane weaponry. Their base attack bonus is equal to
their level divided by five, rounded down. Thus, at first
level, it’s +0, and doesn’t increase to +1 until level five,
and +2 at level ten.

Spellcasting requires the dexterous manipulation
of esoteric energy flows that are hindered by cumbersome armor and exotic materials. If the Arcanist is
wearing powered armor, including vestimentums, or
armor with an Encumbrance value higher than zero,
they cannot effectively cast spells, nor can they do so if
their hands are bound or they are gagged.
Arcanists may learn two new spells from the Arcanist spell list from any level they are capable of casting
each time they advance a level, reflecting their own
research and study. They begin play knowing two first
level spells, plus their Intelligence modifier.
Arcanists may choose their foci from the arcane
focus list in this section, and may choose one additional
bonus arcane focus at first level.
Arcanists gain Magic as a bonus skill. If the Magic
skill is split up into multiple sub-skills in this campaign,
they can pick one of them for a bonus skill instead.

Partial Arcanist Abilities

Some characters may wish to only dabble in an Arcanist’s arts, selecting the Partial Arcanist class option as
an Adventurer. Heroes who choose this option gain
the following traits.
Partial Arcanists suffer a -1 penalty on all hit point
dice they roll. Thus, a Partial Expert/Partial Arcanist
would roll 1d6-1 for their hit points each level, while
a Partial Warrior/Partial Arcanist would roll 1d6+1.
Partial Arcanists suffer a -1 penalty on their base
attack bonus, as calculated by their other partial class.
This penalty cannot reduce the hero’s base attack bonus
below +0. If their other partial class is Magister, their
attack bonus is +0 at first level, +1 at fifth level, and +2
at tenth level.
Partial Arcanists can learn and prepare Arcanist
spells as if an Arcanist of half their level, rounded up.
For casting purposes, they are treated as their full level;
thus, if a spell does 1d6 points of damage per caster level, a 5th level Partial Arcanist does 5d6 damage with it.
Partial Arcanists are as limited as any other Arcanist when it comes to casting spells in heavy armor.
While wearing powered armor, or any other armor
with an Encumbrance value higher than zero, they
cannot effectively cast Arcanist spells.
Partial Arcanists may learn one new spell from
the Arcanist spell list from any level they are capable
of casting each time they advance a level, representing
the fruits of their private research.
Partial Arcanists can choose arcane foci with their
allowed focus picks. They do not gain the bonus arcane
focus that a full Arcanist gets.
Partial Arcanists gain Magic as a bonus skill. If the
Magic skill is split up into multiple sub-skills in this
campaign, they can pick one of them for a bonus skill
instead.

THE MAGISTER •269

THE MAGISTER
A studious follower of a particular magical tradition or
sorcerous order, the Magister is heir to uncounted centuries of arcane learning and focused erudition. While
Magisters do not have the broad magical knowledge
of an Arcanist, their focused study allows them more
flexibility in employing their spells, and less need to
prepare beforehand.

Magister Spellcasting

day. This spell may be from any of the first level spells
they know, and it is not necessary for them to specifically prepare the spell as an Arcanist does. As they
advance in power, they are able to cast more and more
spells each day from higher levels of incantation. A Magister can cast a lower-level spell with a higher-level
slot if they so require, but this does not augment the
spell or make it more effective.
If a Magister suffers damage before they can successfully complete the casting of a spell, the magical energy discharges harmlessly and the spell slot is wasted.
They can attempt to cast the spell again next round if
they still have available slots for that level.

Unlike Arcanists, Magisters focus on a restricted set
of sorceries, and become intimately familiar with a
relatively small number of spells. Their deep familiarity with these spells allows them to cast them without
prior preparation, but it also prevents them from easily
learning new spells or changing their existing list.
At first level, a Magister picks two first level spells
from their allowed list. Each time they advance a level,
they may learn additional spells from their list as given
by the Magister spell table. Each time they advance an
experience level, they may swap out up to two of their
existing spells for different picks of the same spell levels. A Magister cannot learn new spells outside this
progression. If he wants to exchange a known spell
for a different one of the same level, beyond the two
swaps granted by advancement each level, he must
spend three months of study to exchange a single spell.
It is assumed that a Magister can pick from any of the
spells on their school’s spell list unless they are in exceptionally bad odor with their fellows.
A Magister may cast their spells a certain number
of times per day depending on their level. At first level,
for example, they may cast a first level spell thrice per

A Partial Magister uses the exact same rules as a Partial
Arcanist, except that they cast spells from their Magister spell list, and may learn them as if a Magister of half
their character level, rounded up. If a hero chooses to
be a Partial Arcanist/Partial Magister, they keep their
spell lists separate; just because the hero knows a spell
as an Arcanist doesn’t mean that they may cast it with
Magister spell slots. The same separation applies to
their available spell castings per day.

Arcanist Spells Prepared per Day

Magister Spells Usable per Day

Arcanist
Level

Spell Levels

1

1
1

2
-

3
-

4
-

5
-

2

2

-

-

-

3

2

1

-

-

4

3

2

-

5

3

2

6

3

7

4

8

4

9
10+

Magister Class Abilities

Magisters have the exact same class abilities and limitations as an Arcanist, save for their special rules for
learning and casting spells. In campaigns where the
Magic skill is split into multiple sub-skills, they have
the sub-skill appropriate to their school as a bonus instead of Magic.

Partial Magister Abilities

Magister
Level

Spell Levels

1

1
2/3

-

2

2/4

-

-

-

-

-

3

3/5

2/2

-

-

-

-

-

4

3/6

2/3

-

-

-

1

-

-

5

4/6

2/3

2/2

-

-

3

2

-

-

6

4/6

3/4

2/3

-

-

3

2

1

-

7

5/6

3/4

2/3

2/2

-

3

3

2

-

8

5/6

4/5

3/4

2/3

-

5

4

3

2

1

9

5/6

4/5

3/4

3/3

2/2

5

4

3

3

2

10+

5/6

4/6

3/5

3/4

2/3

The entries list the number of spells an Arcanist can
prepare each day of a given spell level. There is no
limit to the number of spells an Arcanist can learn
at each level, assuming a source is found for them.

2
-

3
-

4
-

5
-

Entries list the total spells known each level followed
by the spells castable each day. Thus, at second level,
a Magister knows two first-level spells, and may cast
any combination of them up to four times a day.

270• THE ADEPT

THE ADEPT
The Adept is the catch-all class for those heroes with intrinsic magical abilities that aren’t really spells, but are
clearly supernatural in nature. Adepts can vary wildly
in their abilities; some might have incredible powers
of bodily control, others might have a set of specific
elemental abilities they can invoke, while still others
might be able to invoke specific magical powers with a
freedom and regularity even a Magister cannot match.
The Adept class is designed as a framework to allow a GM to bring in classes from other old-school
games that rely on special abilities gained as a hero advances in character levels. These classes usually have
a few basic powers at first level, and then gain more
special abilities as they advance. It’s likely that any importing will require some tweaking and adjustment on
the GM’s part, but this class can be used as a “container”
to help organize these esoteric gifts.
When importing Adept traditions, be careful not
to devalue the worth of other classes. A combat-focused Adept should be about as good as a Warrior,
rather than superior to one, and an Adept focused on
stealth should not be universally superior to an Expert
cat burglar. The importance of this will vary with the
PC makeup of your group. If you have no other Warriors in the party, for instance, then you don’t have to
be so careful about not stepping on their role.

Adept Class Abilities

Adepts roll 1d6 for their hit points each level, modified
by Constitution.
Adepts have a base attack bonus equal to half their
level, rounded down. Thus, it’s +0 at first level. Specific
Adept traditions may give bonuses to this.

Adepts gain the special abilities of their chosen
tradition. Often, some of these are obtained automatically at first level, while others are gained as the hero
advances in experience. The GM may choose to adjust
the timing of these abilities to smooth out progression.
Adept abilities are invocations. Even when they
require a Main Action to activate, they cannot be interrupted by damage. Adept abilities may be used as
often as the specific ability allows; some have a limit of
so many uses per day, while others might be constantly
in effect.
Adepts may choose to pick their beginning and any
further earned foci from the arcane focus list in this
section, though foci that have to do with spellcasting
are inapplicable to them.

Partial Adept Abilities

Partial Adepts gain the special abilities of their chosen tradition as if they had an Adept level of half their
character level, rounded up. Where these abilities are
influenced by character level, the hero’s full level is applied. Thus, if an intrinsic ability gave them a +1 Armor
Class bonus per level, a 5th level Partial Adept would
gain a +5 bonus to their AC.
Note that some Adept traditions involve granting
a hero a powerful base ability at first level that is then
further elaborated or expanded as they advance. This
type of tradition may not be suitable for a Partial Adept,
or the GM may have to clip back the base ability and
only give the rest of it back as the PC advances in level.
Partial Adepts may choose to pick their beginning
and any further earned foci from the arcane focus list
in this section, though foci that have to do with spellcasting are inapplicable to them.

THE INCANDESCENT ORDER
As an example of an Adept class, the Incandescent Order wields the “power of the Glow” as their inner spiritual purity made manifest through light. The theocratic
ruling institution of several remote star systems, the
Order is currently divided between the Exultants, who
believe that the gift of the Glow is a sign of absolute
spiritual authority over less-gifted sentients, and the
Abstainers, who believe that a Glow-gifted leader can
still fall into serious acts of sin.
The two factions are nominally at peace, but a vicious secret war is waged between them over ultimate
control over Order space and the Radiant Hierarchy
that rules it. Losers of this religious debate and those
disillusioned with the conflict have been forced to flee
Order space for more distant worlds, bringing their
discipline with them.

Any trained adept of the Order can identify a potential acolyte’s Glow potential with a few weeks of
training. Most people have no ability to wield it whatsoever, and some have only a limited gift, but a few
can be taught to become full priests of the light. The
education usually requires four or five years to set a
novice on the path to eventual mastery.
The Order itself is philosophically devoted to the
Holy Light, the radiance of truth, justice, and purity
that the Light embodies. Those who die for the cause
will know the eternity happiness of radiant truth, while
the wicked will be cast forever into the Dark Hells of
ignorance and confusion. The Exultants insist that
anyone who wields the Glow can only temporarily be
confused by sin, while the Abstainers view the Glow
merely as one more tool with which to serve the Light.

THE ADEPT •271

Class Abilities

Order Adepts use the normal class abilities for Adepts
except as noted below.
Order Adepts gain Glow as a bonus skill. Glow is
used to control and apply the powers of the Order, and
may be used as a combat skill for Glow-based attacks.
Gain Order Effort equal to one plus their Glow
skill plus the highest of their Wisdom or Charisma
attribute modifiers. Order Effort works much like a
psychic’s Effort, being Committed and recovered in
the same way, and is used to fuel Order powers. Order
Effort and Psychic Effort are tracked separately.
Order Adepts have a base attack bonus equal to
half their character level, rounded down. At first and
fifth level, the adept gains a cumulative +1 bonus to
their base attack bonus. Thus, at first level their attack
bonus would be +1, and at fifth level it would be +4.
Adepts gain special Order Glow abilities at the
levels listed below.

Partial Class Abilities

Partial Order Adepts use the Partial Adept rules as usual, save for those listed below.
Partial adepts gain Glow as a bonus skill, just as
full Order members do.
Partial adepts have Order Effort equal to one plus
half their Glow skill, rounded up. They do not add their
Wisdom or Charisma attribute modifiers to this total.
Partial adepts gain Order powers as if they were
half their full character level, rounded up. They may
use these powers at their full character level. Thus, a
first level partial Order adept has the 1st level Order
power. At third level, they gain the 2nd level Order
power, and so forth. They would use these abilities as
a character of their level, so a fourth level Partial Order
Adept does 1d10 damage with The Light Within.

Powers of the Glow

The Light Within (Level 1): Commit Effort as an On
Turn action. While Committed, you may radiate
light up to a 20-meter radius, project bolts of light
doing 1d6 damage up to 50 meters away, and ignore up to your character level in hit points of
laser damage from any given attack. At fourth
level the damage of these bolts increases to 1d10,
and at seventh level they become 2d6. Their attack
rolls use the Glow skill and Dexterity modifiers for
combat purposes.
The Light Without (Level 2): Commit Effort for the
scene as an On Turn action. Conjure a purely
visual illusion within 60 meters, the image occupying no more than five meters’ radius. The
image appears perfectly realistic but is intangible
and soundless. The illusion lasts for the rest of the
scene; you can control it with a Move action, causing it to move or changing its location. Invisibility
is not an illusion, though you can create the image
of an opaque object in front of something.

Visual Interdict (Level 3): Commit Effort for the scene as
an On Turn action. You become invisible for the
rest of the scene and immune to laser weaponry
or laser tripwires. This invisibility breaks if you
make an attack or other violent motion. Attacks
from invisible ambush grant +4 to hit and damage, but do not usually count as Execution Attacks
from page 52 unless the other requirements of
such an attack are fulfilled.
Veil of Noon (Level 4): Commit Effort for the scene as
an On Turn action to gain the visual appearance
of any object or person between 50% and 150% of
your height and weight. This appearance conceals
any clothing or equipment you may be carrying,
but its falseness is obvious on touch, and it does
not alter your voice. The illusion lasts for the rest
of the scene or until dropped.
Torrent of Dawn (Level 5): Commit Effort for the day as
an On Turn action to blast visible targets within
100 meters with a blaze of laser energy. A total
number of targets equal to one plus the adept’s
Glow skill can be hit, and each is automatically hit
for 1d10 damage for every two levels of the adept,
rounded down. An Evasion saving throw halves
the damage they take, and a single target can’t be
hit by more than one blast.
Piercing Radiance (Level 5): Commit Effort for the
scene as a Move action to cut a hole two meters
square through up to two meters of any substance
weaker than TL 4 military fortifications. Against
fortifications, this takes two rounds of this ability.
This piercing laser requires a stationary target, so
it is not normally effective against mobile enemies.
If somehow applied to an immobile living target,
it does five points of damage per character level.
Photonic Lift (Level 6): Commit Effort as an On Turn
action. While Committed, the adept can repel
himself from the ground through the emission of
countergravitic luminal waves. The adept can fly
at twice their normal movement rate, hovering
freely as needed and lifting up to one hundred kilograms of additional weight.
Radiant Shield (Level 7): Commit Effort as an On Turn
action. While Committed, you and all allies within 10 meters are immune to harmful light, lasers,
radiation, or other radiant energies.
Tangible Light (Level 8): Commit Effort for the scene
to create a simple physical object of solid light no
larger than 3 meters square. It has hit points equal
to twice your level and vanishes at the scene’s end.
Flickering Leap (Level 9): Commit Effort for the day as
a Move action to leap to any location visible with
your unaided sight as a bolt of pure radiance.
Flesh of Light (Level 10): Commit Effort for the day as an
On Turn action to become an intangible form of
light for one round. You can move freely through
non-solid matter and can use your Glow powers,
but are immune to mundane matter and energy.

272• ARCANE FOCI

ARCANE FOCI
The foci listed below are generally restricted to PCs
with magical abilities, whether Arcanists, Magisters,
or Adepts. Most of them augment a caster’s sorcerous
abilities, though a few add additional perks suitable for
a magically-focused hero.
If a GM is adapting an existing OSR class into an
Arcanist, Magister, or Adept from these rules, unique
abilities that don’t fit neatly in the existing framework
can be treated as foci that the PC must take at the appropriate levels, acquiring them in place of their usual
free choice at first level or ensuing levels. While this
does limit a PC’s versatility to a degree, in most cases
they already have plenty of uniqueness simply by virtue
of their character class. If there’s only one Scion of the
Emerald Blade in your campaign, it doesn’t matter too
much if she has to take a specific set of abilities.

Armored Technique

Applicable only to Arcanists and Magisters, this focus
reflects a hero’s determined practice at channeling arcane energy flows around the encumbrance of heavy
armor and unnatural high-tech materials.
Level 1: You may cast Arcanist or Magister spells while
wearing street or combat armor with an Encumbrance value no higher than one, or in powered
armor with a zero Encumbrance value.
Level 2: You may cast Arcanist or Magister spells regardless of the bulk of your armor.

Cross-Disciplinary Study

Applicable only to Magisters, this allows a hero to learn
a spell from the Arcanist list or from a Magister school
other than their own. They must find a source willing
and able to teach them the spell, and it must be of a level
they can cast, though if taken at first level, it’s assumed
that a tutor or grimoire was found for the spell.
Level 1: You may pick one spell of any level you can cast.
This spell is now known to you. You can change
this spell once per experience level, assuming you
can find a source for the new spell.
Level 2: You may pick one spell for each spell level you
are capable of casting, and may change each of
them once per experience level as noted above.

Imprinted Spell

Applicable only to Arcanists, this focus is for a hero
who has so perfectly readied a spell that they no longer
need to prepare it before casting it. They may cast it in
place of any other spell of equal or higher level, losing
the spell in that slot in order to fuel the sudden casting.
Level 1: You may imprint one spell of any level you can
cast. You can change this spell once per experience
level to another spell you know.
Level 2: You may change your imprinted spell once per
day, when you prepare your other spells.

Initiate of Healing

This focus can only be taken by Arcanists or Magisters
with access to healing spells in their regular spell lists,
not including those who add them via other foci or
means. With it, a magic-user can translate the potential energies of their available spells into enchantments
of physical mending and revitalization. These simple
magics cannot cure diseases or poisons and cannot replace lost limbs, but they can heal any victim not too
far gone to be saved by a lazarus patch.
Level 1: The user may expend a spell slot to heal a visible
ally within 30 meters for 1d6 points of damage per
spell level expended, plus the caster’s Magic skill.
Invoking this healing takes a Main Action, but it
is an invocation and cannot be interrupted.
Level 2: The user is so efficient at triggering natural
healing in a subject that they can call upon the
subject’s natural physical reserves rather than their
own magical energies. As a Main Action, they can
touch a willing subject and heal up to 1d6 points
of damage for every three character levels the user
possesses, rounded up. This healing adds one System Strain to the target, and cannot be performed
if the target is unable to take the strain.

Limited Study

This arcane focus is special in that it can be taken by
anyone, even those without an arcane class, assuming
the GM allows it in her campaign. It reflects a limited
or partial study of the arcane arts, just enough to master the casting of a handful of spells. An Arcanist or
Magister may also take it, to reflect an outside research
topic, but they cannot cast these learned spells with
their usual spell slots.
Level 1: You may learn a single Arcanist or Magister
spell of a level no greater than half your own,
rounded up. You can change this spell once per
level if you can find a tutor for the spell you want
to study. You do not need to prepare this spell,
and can cast it once per day. Your familiarity with
it is such that you can even cast it while wearing
armor, without needing Armored Technique. The
spell is cast using your full character level for any
level-dependent effects.
Level 2: Your limited study has expanded. You may learn
a second spell of a level no greater than half your
character level, rounded up. You may cast this
spell once per day with the same limits as above.

Petty Sorceries

The character is capable of producing minor effects in
line with their general style of magic – phantom sounds,
small and obvious illusions, non-damaging puffs of energy or light, minor physical transformations, or any

ARCANE FOCI •273

other trifling magical effect that fits with their tradition
and isn’t so powerful as to cause damage or directly
affect an unwilling target. This focus has only one level.
Level 1: The caster can invoke these abilities freely for
flavor and role-playing style, but they can only be
concretely useful in play once per game session.
The GM decides whether or not the concrete use
proposed for an effect is appropriate in scale.

Psychic Synergy

as they wish. Any spell they cast that does hit point
damage does an additional +1 damage per die.
Level 2: The spellcaster can convert their magical energy into raw damaging force. The user casts a
spell normally, but at the moment of release, they
transform it into a blast of violent energies that
inflicts 1d6+1 damage per level of the converted
spell to any single target within 100 meters. This
damage includes the bonus level 1 grants to harmful spells.

Savage Sorcery

Applicable only to Arcanists, the hero is extremely wellversed in magical theory and practical spell deployment.
They automatically know all the usual Arcanist spells
of certain levels. This does not include any esoteric enchantments that may have been devised by individual
practitioners.
Level 1: You automatically know all standard first level
Arcanist spells. When you advance a level, you
learn four new spells instead of two.
Level 2: You automatically know all standard Arcanist
spells of levels less than the maximum spell level
you can cast. Thus, if you can cast fourth level
spells, you know all standard Arcanist spells of
levels one through three.

Some magic-using heroes have both arcane and psychic
powers. This focus allows them to blur the lines between their abilities, fueling different spheres of effect
with their separate pools of energy.
Level 1: Once per day as an Instant action, Commit Psychic Effort for the day to cast any spell you have
prepared, if an Arcanist, or known, if a Magister,
or fuel an Adept power that requires Effort to be
Committed. Conversely, you may instead trade
one available spell slot of your highest level to refresh half its level in Committed Effort, rounded
up, or Commit a point of Adept Effort for the day
to restore a point of Committed Psychic Effort.
Level 2: You may convert your power twice per day.
The spellcaster’s powers are keenly attuned to violence
and destruction. Even when bereft of other magical resources, they can still call upon a blast of magical power
appropriate to their tradition or character traits. Some
casters might hurl bolts of crackling lightning, while
others could employ lasers, pillars of flame, or lances of
concussive telekinetic force. This focus is usually taken by Arcanists or Magisters, but some Adepts might
benefit from the first level.
Level 1: As a Main Action invocation, the spellcaster can
blast a visible target within 100 meters with a bolt
that does 1d8 damage plus their character level if
it successfully hits, with the hit roll modified by
their Magic skill. They may use this bolt as often

Vast Erudition

War Caster

Your hero is accustomed to casting in combat, and can
keep focus when less hardened minds would be hopelessly distracted by pain.
Level 1: When injured while casting a spell, you may
make a Physical saving throw to avoid losing it.
Even if your spell is interrupted, you do not lose
the spell slot; only your action is wasted.
Level 2: Whenever you would lose a spell to an interruption, accept damage equal to twice the spell’s
level to continue casting it. If this damage would
reduce you to zero hit points, you complete the
casting before passing out, stable but at zero HP.

