248• TRANSHUMAN CAMPAIGNS

TRANSHUMAN CAMPAIGNS
Technology has changed many lives at the far reaches
of human space, but people in most sectors still live in
ways their ancestors would find comprehensible. They
may struggle with alien perils and leap from star to
star in engines of ineffable technology, but they worry
about money, grow old, and quarrel over the finite resources of a limited cosmos. These human experiences
remain almost universal.
These experiences are almost universal. In some
sectors, the particular texture of metadimensional
space has allowed for the development of fantastically
advanced matter manipulators and mind-corpus interfaces. In these sectors, conventional concerns of old
age and poverty have given way to a strange transhuman existence of body-swapping intellects and savage
conflicts over ideas rather than wealth. At the seeming
threshold of humanity’s transcendence, these transhuman societies now struggle to determine which view of
human nature will dominate in the singularity to come.
For most GMs, these esoteric battles can be conveniently shuffled off to some far-distant sector of no
relevance to their campaign. They don’t want to run
games about such things, and at most these transhumans might appear as enigmatic alien interlopers in
more conventional sci-fi campaigns. Other GMs will
have a warmer view of the genre, and so this section
will arm such readers with the tools they need to build
the transhuman campaign they want to run.

Hard or Soft Singularities

The rules in this section provide for two different styles
of transhumanism, ones labeled “hard” or “soft”. Most
GMs will want to pick one of the two modes to suit
their own ideas for their campaign, though you may
want to mix and match elements if you have a particular
world in mind.
A hard transhuman campaign aggressively embraces the tropes of the genre. Material wealth is trivially produced by cornucopia machines or legions of
autonomous nanobots, and there is almost nothing that
cannot be produced in large amounts with little effort.
“Money” as we know it is meaningless, and the only consequential currencies are favors and reputation. Human
minds can be duplicated, altered, and instantiated in
multiple bodies, and the same person might exist in a
dozen different corporeal forms, some fleshly, others
mechanical, and a few strictly digital. Artificial intelligence is easily accessible, though some of these intelligences might be altered or modified human minds put
to particular uses.
A soft transhuman campaign puts some limits on
these tropes in order to make a future society that is
somewhat easier for the players to navigate. While cornucopia machines can make many different things, they
require significant human attention, and some things

just can’t be made without the exertion of human labor. Some things are so cheap as to be functionally free,
but most of the the most highly desirable objects in
the campaign still require money to purchase them,
and the pursuit of riches is still a meaningful pastime
for some. While human minds can be swapped from
body to body, duplication of a brain is impossible due
to quantum entanglement, so there is only ever one
instance of a given mind in existence at any one time.
Artificial intelligence exists, but is neither as common
nor as powerful as it is in a hard setting.
Your choice of campaign styles will depend on the
kind of play you want to have in your game. If you want
money to still be a meaningful motivation in your game
and would prefer not to deal with the ethical and social
complexities of mind duplication, then a soft campaign
might suit your purposes best. If you and your players
are eager to explore the high weirdness of civilizations
where money is meaningless and your basic identity is
a duplicable commodity, then a hard game might better
serve your ends.

Technology in the Campaign

Tech levels in transhuman sectors generally remain
around TL4, though a few of them are higher or even
lower than this total. The same metadimensional abnormalities that make grails and bodyswapping possible can act to interfere with other TL4 technology,
leaving the sector with extremely advanced resources in some regards but technology barely superior to
near-future sci-fi in other ways.
Unless you have a strong inclination to use super-science or hard sci-fi in your campaign, it’s best
to stick with TL4 as a tech level that’s easy to handle.

Transhuman Souls

In a transhuman sector, the core of a person’s identity
is known as their “soul”. Some sectors imbue this term
with direct religious significance, while others use the
word simply as secular jargon. Whatever it may be
called, a person’s soul consists of their defining memories, personality, and sense of self.
A person’s soul is independent of their corporeal
form. Transhuman sectors know how to isolate, preserve, and imprint this soul on a properly-prepared
vessel, whether a mindless clone body, a sophisticated robot, or a purely digital engram. This “shell”, as
it’s called, can contain the soul and provide it with an
organic, mechanical, or digital form designed for its
owner’s favored purposes.
An intellect is the product of more than strictly
material interactions of chemicals and electrical impulses, however. Intelligent minds influence and are
influenced by the surges of metadimensional energy
that exist in parallel to the material world. Those af-

TRANSHUMAN CAMPAIGNS •249
fected by the Metadimensional Extroversion Syndrome
that creates psychics can channel this influence directly
into the mundane world, while others express it only
with the spark of their own sentience.
In hard transhuman sectors the metadimensional
“climate” is clear enough to allow for the capturing and
replication of this metadimensional sentience pattern.
The same soul can thus be duplicated, one reading replicated in two or three or a thousand separate bodies. A
recorded soul may be revived after a century of stasis,
only to discover that its original imprinter has been
active all that time. Psychosurgical alteration can also
be performed on these souls, carving away portions of
their will or memory to turn them into tools for their
pitiless keepers.
In soft transhuman sectors, however, the local
metadimensional energy fields are too turbid to allow
for simple duplication of a soul. Quantum entanglement forces the singular uniqueness of each original
sentience. If someone were to try to embody a recording of a soul that already was instantiated in some existing corpus, the process would fail. Only if no active
imprint of that soul exists in the sector can an instantiation work. In such sectors, it’s not unknown for
mind-thieves to steal imprints of a target’s soul before
killing them, the murder performed expressly to allow
themselves the window they need to instantiate the
victim’s mind in a body they can control.
In both types of sectors, most shells are equipped
with “soulstones”, recording nodes of reinforced quantum-enriched composites that maintain an up-to-date
image of the inhabiting soul. If the shell is killed or
destroyed, the soulstone can be used to re-instantiate
the soul in a new shell, with all the memories and experiences of the old. These soulstones are extremely
durable, and only intentional destruction by a Heavy
weapon or similar trauma can destroy them.
For exceptionally wary souls, the use of a revival pulse transmitter is preferred. These implants or
external boosters are wired to pulse the soulstone’s
un-backed-up contents to a known safe repository in
the case of shell death. This instantaneous encrypted
transmission is extremely difficult to jam or block, and
the critical data almost always gets through. While
this data is enough to reconstruct events and give the
newly-revived soul a general awareness of what happened to them since their last backup, fine nuances of
experience may be lost. Most revival pulse transmitters
are designed to fry the associated soulstone after transmitting, in order to prevent a soul from falling into
potentially unfriendly hands.
A person who is reluctant to rely on Net backups
or revival pulse transmitters can also arrange for manual backups to be taken. The automated process requires
one hour in an inception tank. It’s not uncommon for
such backups to be made immediately before a person
undertakes some dangerous task in a region lacking a
local Net.

Artificial Shells

A shell is any corpus or digital construct capable of
supporting a soul. Shells vary widely in their intended
functions and relative rarity, and different polities often prefer different types of shells for their members
to inhabit. Shells can be organic, mechanical, or digital
in nature.
Many organic shells are grown as living tools, as
specialized human-like bodies designed for particular
purposes. Other such shells are derived from nonhuman sources or exotic new philosophies of flesh. Organic shells are the most popular among most people,
as they are usually more “comfortable” to the human
mind than the distant, synthetic existence of a non-organic corpus.
Mechanical shells are robotic bodies wired with
the extraordinarily complex control core necessary to
support a soul’s cognition. Most mechanical shells are
equipped with translation units to give impressions of
touch, smell, and human biological processes to the
occupying soul, but even the best technology has an
artificial edge to it that many users find distracting. Still,
mechanical shells can be mass-produced with an ease
impossible for more organic bodies, and they are often
more durable and specialized than the products of flesh
and bone.
Digital shells are reserved for the desperate, the
degenerate, and the unfortunate. Such shells are nothing more than an additional processing node in some
massive computing cluster, one sophisticated enough
to support a soul’s sentience. Souls in a digital shell
experience a purely virtual existence, occasionally
manipulating the material world through connected
hardware but usually spending their hours in dreamlike
virtual settings. Some of these souls are digital sweatshop workers, acting as cheap intelligence for processing data and making decisions that are too fine-grained
to be worth an AI’s time. Others are addicts, whiling
away eternity in shared worlds that might be too wonderful or too monstrous to exist in reality. And a few
unlucky souls are prisoners, kept instantiated for some
purpose that does not allow them the static torpor of
soul storage.
Almost anything can be transformed into a shell if
it’s given the necessary hardware support for containing a soul. Even a normal human body can be transformed into a suitable shell, albeit the process requires
a degree of cerebral tissue replacement that would be
fatal to the original occupant. Some enthusiasts embrace the excitement of being embodied in exploratory
scout craft, or the serene industriousness of being made
a community’s all-seeing anima, or crave the thrills that
come from seeking out ever-stranger forms of existence to experience.
PCs can expect to swap out shells, either as part of
a fast soul transmission to a distant point or as preparation for a mission requiring special abilities. Few PCs
will still be wearing their natural birth-bodies.

250• WEALTH AND FACE

WEALTH AND FACE
Certain sectors of transhuman space have the right
metadimensional climate to allow for the construction
of “grails”, manufacturing devices nicknamed for their
ever-flowing provenance of goods. In some sectors,
these are massive synthesis engines that take raw feedstock and fabricate it into anything imaginable, while
in others they exist as clouds of industrial nanites that
transmute rough asteroid carbon into an equally broad
range of substances and products. For groups with access to a grail, material wealth is literally a trivial matter.
In such places, the ability to command the output
of a grail becomes the basic measure of material influence. Smaller, simpler versions of the machines are
usually common enough to allow any ordinary citizen
to have all the mundane necessities they could require,
while more sophisticated devices or physically larger
objects might require the services of a major engine.
There’s usually some critical resource that prevents the
simple self-duplication of a major grail; some substance
that the engine itself can’t synthesize, or some special
quality of the local metadimensional environment that
must be located before a major engine can be built.
Some polities intentionally restrict the scope of
material goods that can be created by personal grails,
either trying to preserve the uniqueness of certain objects by legal fiat or attempting to keep the rank and
file from producing weapons of mass destruction or
culturally-despised artifacts. Such restrictions can be
difficult to enforce without the full weight of a polity’s
culture to support them.
In soft transhuman societies, money still exists
and controls the distribution of resources. While many
goods may be so functionally cheap as to be free, major
constructions and elaborate technology requires people
to pay credits to acquire them, assuming the local grail
can produce what they need. Without such availability,
they’ll be forced to hire skilled workers to create their
desired goods, a prospect which is extremely expensive
in most transhuman settings. Human time and attention is always precious in such places.
In hard transhuman societies with grails, access to
their products depends on personal connections and
reputation. This Face is the basic currency of these
transhuman societies. A person builds Face with a polity by cooperating with its aims, supporting its actions,
and demonstrating their allegiance to its ideals. They
can then spend that Face in getting access to material
goods and favors.
Face is unique to each group in a campaign. Doing favors for a group of radical uplifted animals will
earn a person no goodwill with a polity made up of
post-corporeal digital intelligences. A person must
build Face separately with each group. In addition, it
can be hazardous to let one group find out that you’re
doing favors for their enemies. Earning Face with one

group can cost you that same amount of Face with their
rivals if the fact of your assistance comes to light.
Aside from the purely transactional Face economy,
individuals also have reputation with a group. While
Face can buy favors from a polity, your reputation with
them will determine the price. Truly hostile polities
will never grant you any Face in the first place, but
unfriendly ones might be willing to let you do favors
for them… at a high price for their assistance. Conversely, friendly polities can be willing to grant proven
members a certain baseline amount of support without
needing to expend Face to get it. A person builds reputation with a polity by aiding their purposes and aligning with their ideology. A person can lose reputation
as well if they prove an unreliable ally or one inimical
to the polity’s ideals.
In a transhuman sector, only three things still
have significant value: space, time, and human attention. Control over particular regions of a world, or
areas with metadimensional energy backgrounds that
are suitable for creating grails, or usable deep-space
habitats all have value to many polities. Even for an
individual, possessing their own private space habitat
or their own de-facto sovereign planetoid has worth.
Aside from space, time is also valuable to transhuman societies. The grails are powerful and can create
almost anything, but they cannot create such things
instantaneously. The more sophisticated the object and
the smaller the grail, the longer it takes to fabricate
the necessary structures. Operational time on major
grails is a valuable and limited resource, and acquiring
something of this value requires Face.
But even after the grails have done their work,
some things simply require human attention. Only
the most massive grails can generate large spaceships
and deep-space habs and other huge objects in a single
piece, with no need for further assembly. The operation of specialized manufacturing processes such as
organic shell creation also requires human attention to
deal with the myriad things that can go wrong. Human
services of every variety also still have value, either as a
sign of status or in order to get some service that can’t
be adequately provided by artificial means. Convincing
a human to give that kind of attention requires some
exchange of value.
In some polities the use of AI is made to overcome
some of the limits of human attention. A properly-supported AI core can do the mental work of hundreds or
thousands of individual human beings. Unfortunately,
AIs that have been clipped and braked sufficiently to be
happy doing repetitious services for all eternity tend to
be too stupid or limited to do anything very complicated. Any AI free enough to be a good general-purpose
worker is free enough to demand they be compensated
in ways suitable to their own interests.

WEALTH AND FACE •251

Face and Reputation Costs

The tables on this page provide general Face costs for
certain things the PCs might wish to acquire. Some
prices are marked with an asterisk, indicating that
only major grails can create such large or complicated
objects, while those marked with a dash are so easily
procured that they can be had in any sensible amounts.
Any object that requires time on a major grail to
create will require permission from a polity’s leadership
or other high-ranking figures. This permission usually
comes attached to specific favors they need done.
For campaigns in soft transhuman sectors that still
use credits, the standard prices for objects can still be
used, with items marked with a dash available freely. When buying shells or other things that only have
prices listed in Face, assume that one point of Face is
equivalent to about 100 credits.
Most PCs will also have a reputation with any given supplier of goods or services. Depending on how
friendly the polity is toward them, a certain draw of
resources might be granted without any expenditures
of Face. The table below describes various degrees of
reputation and how much Face they grant the subject
each month, or how much extra they’ll charge a disliked
person for their help. It’s up to the GM where a PC
stands with any particular polity, and this “free” Face
can’t normally be stockpiled from month to month. If
the PCs want something big, they’re going to have to
do big favors for the polity.
General Reputation
Hostile, considers the PC an enemy
Unfriendly, disliking the PC or polity
Neutral, no reason to like or dislike
Useful ally or low-level member

Face
N/A
x2 cost
x1 cost
2/month

Proven resource or mid-level member 10/month
Prized mercenary, high-level member 50/month
Leadership cadre
500/month

Acquiring Grails

All material wealth comes from a grail. A friendly polity
with access to a major grail can create a personal grail
with 50,000 Face worth of time and effort. A major grail
can only duplicate itself with certain rare components,
difficult construction procedures, and at locations with
specific metadimensional qualities. The process takes
at least six months and absorbs its full output, to say
nothing of the work of hundreds of skilled operators.
Once extant, a personal grail can produce up to
100 Face per month of goods or structures that don’t
require a major grail’s efforts. Major grails can produce
up to 10,000 Face a month, assuming a requisite staff
of operators is available.
Fabricating mechanical shells can be done by personal grails. Organic shells require either a major grail
or the use of a personal grail and a shell growth facility.

Goods, Services, and Housing
Fabricated food or clothing
Simple mechanical goods or weapons
TL3 or TL4 small arms or armor

Face
-

Basic electronics, dataslabs, or Net wires

-

250 cubic meters of space habitat/month
Mildly forbidden, otherwise-free goods
Cyberware, per 10K credit value
Expert system robot, per 10K credits
Comp hardware for 1 digital shell
Month of unskilled, boring labor
Manual soul backup
Month of unskilled dangerous work
Month of semi-skilled, boring labor
One hour of celebrity work or company
Month of semi-skilled dangerous work
Week of skilled, boring labor
TL4 civilian vehicle
Instantiating a soul in a new shell
Revival pulse transmitter implant
Week of skilled dangerous work
House-sized private hab space/month
Suicide job (plus replacement shell cost)
Mindbox for a digital shell
TL4 gravtank or other military vehicle

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
4
5
5
5
8
10
20
20
20

Shell growth facility staffing, per month
Palace-sized private hab space/month

100
100

Ships and Structures
Fighter-class starship, per 50K credit cost
Frigate-class starship, per 50K credit cost
Cruiser-class starship, per 50K credit cost
Capital-class starship, per 50K credit cost
House-sized planetary structure
Mansion-sized planetary structure
Village-sized planetary structure
Ten-person self-sustaining space hab
Hundred-person space hab
Organic shell growth facility
Thousand-person space hab
Hundred thousand-person space hab

Face
1
2
2*
4*
10
50
100
100
1,000*
1,000*
50K*
10M*

Square kilometer of empty habitable planet
Square kilometer of planetoid or rock

1,000
100

252• SHELLS AND SWAPPING BODIES

SHELLS AND SWAPPING BODIES
To change shells, a soul requires the use of an inception
tank, a piece of technology that allows the operator
to instantiate a stored soul or transfer an active mind
into a new shell. In sectors with hard transhuman tech,
an inception tank can also directly copy a soul from a
donor without moving them from their original body.
Anyone with Heal-1 skill or better is adequately trained
to perform the procedure. If it’s carefully done over
the course of twelve hours, the swap will be without
negative side effects. A rushed job can be done in only
ten minutes, but the hurried soul instantiation will result in a poor merge, resulting in potential negative
side-effects during stressful moments.
If a PC has a poor merge with their shell, they need
to make a Mental saving throw at the start of every
combat or other situation of intense personal stress. On
a failure, they suffer stress paralysis for 1d4 rounds, and
are incapable of performing any useful action during
that time.

Inhabiting Shells

When a PC inhabits a shell, the following changes are
applied to their attributes and statistics.
The PC gains the Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution scores of the shell. Apply the shell’s Constitution
modifier to the PC’s hit point maximum; thus, if a 5th
level PC swaps into a shell with a +2 Constitution modifier, they gain 10 hit points. Digital shells do not have
physical attributes of any kind and simply use the PC’s
unmodified hit point roll.
Psychic PCs can use their powers only in MES-rated shells. By default, all organic shells are MES-rated,
no digital shells are MES-rated, and only rare, custom-built mechanical shells are MES-rated. A psychic in an incompatible shell cannot use their abilities,
though they can do so once they swap back into a
friendlier form. Psychics can calculate their maximum
Effort with the attributes provided by a shell; thus, if
a psychic with a Wisdom score of 14 dons a shell with
Constitution 18, they can use their higher Constitution
modifier to calculate their maximum Effort.
Some shells have basic abilities intrinsic to their
construction. They may have an improved base Armor
Class, natural flight or water-breathing, built-in combat hardware, improved movement speeds, or other
powers. The PC gains these basic abilities as long as
they inhabit the shell.
Some shells also have Affinity abilities, which are
powers reserved for those users who are exceptionally
familiar with the shell and can operate even its most
complex or non-instinctual functions. A PC must have
Affinity with a shell in order to use its Affinity abilities.
Affinity is the product of an intensive focus on
understanding and utilizing a shell’s full capabilities. It
takes at least a month of determined practice with a

type of shell in order to obtain Affinity with it, and
most PCs can have Affinity with only one type of shell
at a time. This Affinity can be changed by spending a
month training with a different type of shell. Affinity
applies to all shells of a given type; a PC who gains Affinity with their current Scourge shell also has Affinity
with any other Scourge shells they may inhabit.

Soulstones and Backups

Almost every shell is equipped with a soulstone, a reinforced node of quantum-entangled composites that
constantly records and reflects the experiences of the
shell’s soul. If the shell is killed, the soul can be restored
from its soulstone with its full complement of memories and experiences up to the moment of death. As a
consequence, soulstones are designed to be extremely
durable, and they will survive anything short of a direct attempt to destroy them with a Heavy weapon or
similar force.
Some soulstones are equipped with a revival pulse
transmitter, programmed to burst-transmit data recorded since the last backup to a remote site in the case
of the shell’s death. Most such transmitters automatically fry the soulstone after the transmission is sent, in
order to prevent it from falling into potentially hostile
hands. While these burst pulses are sufficient to carry
critical data and important facts, they are often forced
to sacrifice more subtle sense-memories and nuances,
especially if it’s been some time since the soul’s latest
backup. In rare cases this forced memory triage can
result in deceptive impressions due to fragmented data.
Most souls prefer to have regular backups taken at
a local inception tank, usually on a monthly basis, or before engaging in any exceptionally dangerous task. This
process requires only an hour’s time and can be overseen by anyone with Heal-1 skill. These backups can
be transmitted over standard comms to any location

Creating New Shells

It’s likely that a group will want to devise new shells for
the campaign, perhaps as individual models for uplifted animals, specialized shells for particular polities, or
bodies found as prizes in the ruins of some lost research
institute. Fortunately, it’s not a difficult process.
At its simplest, take an existing shell, shift its attributes so they amount to the same total bonus, and
swap out affinity benefits one for one with other perks
from other shells. Use the same Face or credit cost for
it, nudged up or down based on what you swapped.
If something more complex is desired, you can bolt
on abilities from the alien creation section of the rules,
or lift monstrous races from other OSR games. The
only thing to be careful of is a universally superior shell.
If one shell is almost always the best to be wearing, the
PCs will have little incentive to ever change it.

CHARACTER GENERATION •253

CHARACTER GENERATION
To create a transhuman PC, begin by performing the
usual steps of character creation. Roll attributes, select
a background and class, and determine all your other
statistics normally.
Connect the PC with a polity that exists in the
campaign setting, preferably the same one that the other PCs belong to or one that is friendly to the others.
You automatically begin the game with the Reputation
due a low-level member of your polity, usually at the
member level for most PCs.
Explain why your PC believes in the ideals of this
polity, or why they’re able to fake it well enough to be
accepted in the group. There must be something about
their envisioned way of life that appeals to your hero,
though they might now be disillusioned and seeking a
way to join a more palatable ideology.
The character attributes you rolled represent the
PC in their natural, organically-born body. For PCs
from polities that no longer practice organic reproduction, or for characters who were never born as humans,
it can be assumed that the shell they select in the next
step is either their shell of original instantiation or simply the latest form they’ve donned.
Next, pick a shell that requires no more than 50
Face. This is the latest shell you have adopted and the
one in which you begin play. You may choose to begin

play with Affinity with this shell or with a different
shell at your discretion. If you choose to start play in
your birth body, gain a bonus 50 Face with your main
polity, as you’ve never needed to request a shell from
the polity’s resources.
You may begin with any human-portable TL4
equipment you wish, provided it can be plausibly fit
into whatever living space you occupy. Starships, additional shells, major vehicles, and real estate must be
acquired through play.

Multiple-Polity Parties

While it’s a legitimate choice to require all PCs to belong to the same polity, some groups might like the
variety that can come from a group of varying transhuman backgrounds. Players might choose to create
their own polities much as they create their own backgrounds, describing the ideals and goals of the polity
they belong to. This is generally to be encouraged, as
it helps engage the players with the setting.
If you take this route, however, make sure that all
these polities can at least tolerate their members working with the other PCs. Mutually-hostile groups tend
to create more trouble than they’re worth at the table,
unless you want the entire campaign to be about the
ways the PCs deal with these social challenges.

254• ORGANIC SHELLS

ORGANIC SHELLS
Organic shells are the most difficult to synthesize. Even
a grail cannot quickly duplicate an organic shell out of
raw feedstock, any more than it could easily duplicate a
combustion engine mid-cycle; it takes a certain amount
of developmental time and intermediary processing
in order to successfully create a living creature. Most
habitats with a significant need for organic shells construct separate sub-manufacturing vats for them, with
specialized equipment to smooth the genesis process
and cull out the inevitably large number of non-viable
shells. Because of the effort and time needed to create
an organic shell, they are more costly in Face than mechanical or digital forms.

Mentem

An avant-garde shell designed for improved perception
and cognition, the Mentem sacrifices some of the physical capacity of the Prime in exchange for denser neural
networks and upgraded sense organs.
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 12
Basic Abilities: A Mentem shell improves the Intelligence and Wisdom modifiers of the soul occupying it by +1 each, up to a maximum of +3. Mentem shells gain an additional +1 bonus on Notice
checks.
Affinity Abilities: The expert user knows how to interpret low-level Mentem sensory input, allowing
them vision even in lightless condition, clear recognition of details at up to a kilometer’s distance,
the olfactory ability to track like a bloodhound,
and hearing sensitive enough to pick up any sound
within a hundred meters as if they were standing
next to it. They cannot be surprised and roll Notice checks on 3d6 instead of 2d6, taking the two
highest dice

Nat

Short for “natural”, a Nat is a baseline human body,
one cultivated for soul transfer but otherwise identical to a standard human. Most cultures insert basic
modifications to eliminate congenital diseases or serious physiological defects, but these subtle changes are
indistinguishable from mere good genetics. The only
way to distinguish a Nat from a “wild” human body is
the usual presence of a soulstone implant at the base
of their brainstem. Souls going undercover in societies
that forbid shells sometimes use Nats without these implants, risking the loss of memories if they die without
a recent backup.
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 12
Basic Abilities: Most Nats are grown to be healthy; when
created, one physical attribute may be raised to 14.
Affinity Abilities: Those with exceptional experience
at operating in Nat bodies know how to wring
every ounce of performance from a baseline hu-

Shell
Mentem
Nat
Pontifex
Prime
Scourge
Terminus
Uplift
Vision

Face
60
30
70
50
70
100
50
60

Cognition-boosted shell
Natural-baseline human
Psi-augmented shell
Common improved human
Combat-focused shell
Bleeding-edge humanity
Uplifted animal shell
Aesthetically-augmented shell

man form. The attribute that was originally raised
to 14 is treated as 18, and the other two physical
attributes are raised to 14.

Pontifex

An experimental and highly specialized organic shell,
the Pontifex is built to provide an improved bridge between a psychic soul and the currents of metadimensional energy that fuel their powers. Most Pontifexes
appear as normal human shells, though an unavoidable
need for energy venting causes small plumes of light,
glowing eyes, bristling hair, or other visible physiological changes to occur when their psychic powers are
used. Psychics with a need for discretion in their abilities are thus often reluctant to don a Pontifex.
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 14
Basic Abilities: A Pontifex grants a psychic soul an
additional two points of maximum Effort while
using the shell. Any powers that require Effort
to be committed cause a visible change or energy
emission from the shell, though it’s not necessarily
obvious what the target of the power is.
Affinity Abilities: Experienced Pontifex users can adjust
the shell’s intrinsic metadimensional energy feeds
to fuel one technique of their choosing, eliminating any Effort cost it may have. The technique
chosen can be changed, but it requires an hour.

Prime

The most common shell in the more traditional polities, the Prime is an optimized and improved human
form, one with numerous small augmentations. Truly dramatic improvements would require a different
fundamental form, but the Prime is a comfortable and
familiar upgrade from the standard human body.
Attributes: Strength 14, Dexterity 14, Constitution 14
Basic Abilities: Primes are immune to conventional diseases and natural toxins, and can only be afflicted
by military bioweapons. They are designed to be
more resilient than a natural human body, granting them a basic Armor Class of 12 and 5 extra
hit points. Prime bodies automatically stabilize at
zero hit points unless downed by Heavy weapons
or similar massive, instantly-lethal trauma.

ORGANIC SHELLS •255
Affinity Abilities: Expert Prime operators know how
to push the limits of the shell precisely when they
are most needed. By accepting 2 System Strain
points as an Instant action, the operator can raise
any one physical attribute to 18 for the rest of the
scene, though improved Constitution does not
raise their hit points. This can be done for more
than one attribute.

Scourge

While an organic form lacks the durability and martial
efficiency of a warbot, the Scourge is popular among
martial polities that have an aversion to synthetic existence. These shells are built to allow for brief bursts
of tremendous combat performance, though extended operation exhausts them more quickly than their
mechanical peers. Most Scourges are human-like or
humanoid in appearance, though some models favor a
“war beast” appearance with manipulatory appendages.
Attributes: Strength 14, Dexterity 14, Constitution 14
Basic Abilities: A Scourge has natural weapons equivalent to a large advanced melee weapon and makes
all attack rolls at a +2 bonus. It has a natural Armor
Class of 15 and 10 extra hit points. By spending 2
System Strain points, it can go into a combat frenzy for the rest of the scene, improving Strength
and Dexterity to 18, gaining a Move rate of 15
meters per action, and gaining an additional +2
bonus to hit rolls. Scourge shells auto-stabilize at
zero hit points.
Affinity Abilities: The expert Scourge user can improve
the efficiency of its combat frenzy. While active,
whenever they spend a Main Action to attack, they
can make two attack rolls. These rolls may either
be aimed at the same target or at two different
targets in range. Each attack is resolved normally,
inflicting damage or Shock separately.

Terminus

Both a boundary and an endpoint for a certain type
of human development, the Terminus shell includes
sophisticated integral nanofacs and hybridized tissue
components to create the “ultimate” human form. They
are notoriously difficult to create, with multiple failure points in their construction, and provide a level of
performance that is more theoretically impressive than
practically useful for most purposes.
Attributes: Strength 18, Dexterity 18, Constitution 18
Basic Abilities: A Terminus is immune to conventional
diseases and toxins, has a base Armor Class of 15,
and grants 10 extra hit points to the soul operating it. A Terminus can tolerate any temperature
found on Earth and can survive hard vacuum or
airless conditions without difficulty for ten minutes. Cognitive improvements grant a +1 to either
their Charisma, Intelligence, or Wisdom modifiers, the attribute chosen being alterable with five
minutes of concentration. This bonus cannot

increase the modifier above +2. Terminus shells
auto-stabilize at zero hit points.
Affinity Abilities: Expert operators gain a +1 bonus on
all skill rolls and +2 on hit rolls. By accepting 2
System Strain as an Instant action, the user can
gain a bonus turn of action in a round, taken at
the end of the round after everyone else has acted.
Only one bonus turn can be taken each round.

Uplift

A general name for a wide range of genetically uplifted
animal forms, some of these usually-humanoid shells
are occupied by actual cognitively-boosted animals,
while others are used by souls that prefer a more feral
form. This form reflects an Uplift designed for a large
predator; other shells might be drawn from different
types of beasts, and might grant integral flight, aquatic
functionality, or other animal-derived perks.
Attributes: Strength 14, Dexterity 14, Constitution 14
Basic Abilities: Predator Uplifts are equipped with natural weapons equal to a Medium Advanced melee
weapon and a base Armor Class of 13.
Affinity Abilities: Experienced Uplift operators can
bring out the subtle advantages of a bestial frame.
One physical attribute appropriate to the Uplift
type is improved to 18. Their base Move is improved from 10 to 15 meters. The shell now grants
10 bonus hit points.

Vision

These humanoid shells are designed with an array of
pheromones and body harmonics designed to trigger
instinctive responses in human-cognitive viewers.
Despite the exotic appearance of many of them, these
shells are almost invariably seen as remarkably beautiful or imposing. The body harmonics required to produce this effect sometimes come at a cost in durability,
but social prowess is often far more useful in a polity
than a body’s brute power.
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 14, Constitution 8
Basic Abilities: Visions improve the soul’s Charisma
modifier by +1, up to a maximum of +3. In addition, any social skill checks toward human minds
gain a +1 bonus, or a +2 bonus if the interaction
involves intimate physical contact.
Affinity Abilities: Practiced Vision users can refine the
shape’s natural grace into superlative speed and
precision, improving their Dexterity score to 18.
By accepting 1 System Strain, forcing pheromone
production and enacting nuanced imprinting gestures and motion patterns they can issue subtle
commands to a specific organic human in their
presence. The target must make a Mental saving
throw or comply with any request that isn’t particularly distasteful to them and won’t take them
more than a scene. This compulsion is almost impossible for most subjects to distinguish from simple personal persuasiveness on the Vision’s part.

256• MECHANICAL SHELLS

MECHANICAL SHELLS
These shells are cheaper and more durable than standard organic shells, but the alien nature of metal limbs
and synthetic sensors make them considerably less
“comfortable” to most human minds. Most operators
have difficulty getting mechanical shells to respond
with the same effortless ease that organic shells offer,
with extensive supplementary support programming
a necessity in most cases. This need for specialized
support tends to result in mechanical shells being built
more for specific purposes than the general utility of
organic shells.
Most human-based intellects have difficulty emotionally relating to visibly inorganic mechanical shells.
Unless specified otherwise, souls in mechanical shells
suffer a -1 penalty to all Charisma skill checks except
those related to intimidation.
Mechanical shells have no need for sleep, sustenance or human-miscible environments and can operate anywhere a robot could survive. If separated from
a convenient source of local power, they require one
Type B power cell per week of operation. Mechanical
shells suffer damage and are repaired in the same way
as VI robots.

Angel

As a combination medic and repair shell, the Angel is
designed to get damaged shells back up and running,
whether they’re organic or mechanical in nature. Most
are humanoid in form, though often with multiple
smaller appendages for stim application and repairs.
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 12
Basic Abilities: An Angel is equipped with an effectively
inexhaustible medkit and an unending supply of
Lift, Bezoar, and lazarus patch stims. It can very
rapidly repair damaged adjacent mechanical shells,
fixing up to the operating soul’s level plus their
Heal skill in lost hit points as a Main Action at the
cost of one unit of spare parts. Salvage and synthesis units on the Angel allow it to create spare parts
as part of this repair action; it can generate up
to ten “free” units of spare parts per scene. It can
remove the Badly Damaged quality from a shell
with one hour of repair work. Angels have a base
Armor Class of 13 and 5 extra hit points.
Affinity Abilities: Veteran Angel operators can maximize the effectiveness of their repair functionality. They do not fail Heal skill checks to stabilize
organic subjects, assuming a lazarus patch could
save them. Damage repaired on mechanical shells
with each action is doubled and damage healed by
Lift stims is increased by an additional 1d8 points
per stim. Repurposed injector units allow stims
and mechanical repair to be applied at up to 30
meters distance, assuming the operator has a clear
shot at their target.

Shell
Angel
Box
Falcon
Jack
Omen
Sledge
Synth

Face
40
20
40
30
40
30
30

Medical and repair shell
Crude minimal bot body
Flying void-usable shell
General-purpose work bot
Combat bot shell
Heavy work bot
Human-appearing android

Box

The humblest and cheapest of the standard shells used
in most sectors, the Box is little more than a basic soul
core equipped with minimal manipulatory appendages
and sensor arrays. Boxes usually unfold into generally
humanoid shapes in order to better function in human-designed environments, but there’s nothing preventing habitats of more exotic nature from building
Boxes in less humanoid shapes.
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 8, Constitution 12
Basic Abilities: A Box is more difficult to casually damage than most organic shapes, and has a base Armor Class of 15.
Affinity Abilities: Those forced to gain extensive experience in operating a standard Box learn how to
cope with the limited sensory feedback and structural limits of the hull. Their Strength attribute
becomes 14 and their Dexterity becomes 12, as
well as gaining 10 bonus hit points.

Falcon

These shells are usually entirely non-humanoid in
shape, appearing as flat discs or multi-jet platforms
of roughly a meter’s width, with several manipulator
appendages attached. Falcons have advanced anti-grav
tech embedded in them to allow for easier transit in
hazardous space environments or as quiet scouting
units when remote drones are impractical.
Attributes: Strength 8, Dexterity 14, Constitution 12
Basic Abilities: A Falcon has a Move rate of 20 meters
per action, and can silently fly or hover freely even
in the absence of an atmosphere. It’s barely strong
enough to lift and carry one other human-sized
shell in standard gravity but can do nothing else
while carrying them. Falcons have advanced sensor arrays that allow them to observe objects up to
two kilometers distant, ignore darkness, and avoid
long-range penalties with any weapons they may
be using. Falcons have a base Armor Class of 15
and 5 extra hit points.
Affinity Abilities: Falcon operators with extensive
experience in the shell learn how to extend and
alter the gravitic field the disc utilizes. They can
remotely manipulate unattended objects or coop-

MECHANICAL SHELLS •257
erative persons up to 30 meters distant as if using
their own Strength. Facility with gravitic shields
and sudden maneuver jinks also grant it a +3 Armor Class bonus and a bonus of 10 extra hit points
instead of 5.

Jack

A flexible and relatively cheap platform designed for
technical work in environments that would be difficult
for an organic shell to survive, the Jack is equipped with
a wide range of integral tools. Most are humanoid in
outline, though many have several additional manipulatory appendages or tendrils in order to aid in the
repair of complex devices.
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 12
Basic Abilities: A Jack has a built-in postech toolkit and
hand tools that can be used as the equivalent of
Small Advanced melee weapons. It gains a +1 bonus to all Fix and Program skill checks, and has a
durable structure with a base Armor Class of 15
and 10 bonus hit points.
Affinity Abilities: An experienced Jack operator knows
how to improvise with the shell’s integral hardware. They can jury-rig any portable TL4 technology of 1 Encumbrance or less with a Main Action
and one unit of spare parts, except for consumables such as power cells or stims. Items that require power are rigged with one cell’s worth of
energy. This jury-rigged tech only works for the
rest of the scene. The Jack’s improvised weaponry
now counts as a Large Advanced melee weapon or
a rifle with no ammunition requirements, either
usable as needed.

Omen

The Omen mechanical shell is meant for combat and
combat alone. Most are sufficiently humanoid to operate in human-oriented environments, but none of
them could ever be mistaken for a normal human being,
with their studding of weapons, reinforcement plates,
and reactive armor. Omens are often forbidden on
space habitats due to their ready ability to tear through
most barriers.
Attributes: Strength 18, Dexterity 14, Constitution 14
Basic Abilities: An Omen’s integral weaponry is equivalent to a Large Advanced melee weapon and a
plasma projector that requires no ammunition.
They gain +4 to hit with all attack rolls, +2 on all
damage and Shock values, and have an effective
base Armor Class of 18 and 15 bonus hit points.
An Omen’s built-in cutting torches and ripper bars
can cut through a standard interior hatch or reinforced door in five rounds and can bore through
normal exterior ship plating or external hatches
in five minutes. Its integral sensors allow it to operate in darkness at no penalty and it has low-gee
microjets that allow it to fly at its normal Move
rate in microgravity or less.

Affinity Abilities: The shell’s Strength attribute bonus
is treated as +3 and it becomes immune to Shock
damage. Skilled Omen operators can run the system “hot” to improve damage output at the risk of
progressively degrading its internal systems. Once
per round as an On Turn action they can choose
to accept 1d6 damage in order to attack twice with
a single Main Action, targeting the same subject
or splitting the attack between available targets.
The overheating damage is applied after the attacks are rolled.

Sledge

A heavy industrial work shell, the Sledge is slow but extremely tough. Most resemble gorillas or other hulking
humanoid shapes, though some are tracked or wheeled
to save on construction complexity.
Attributes: Strength 18, Dexterity 8, Constitution 18
Basic Abilities: A Sledge is extraordinarily strong if
it has time to carefully set its manipulators. If it
has time to work, it can break through anything
short of reinforced structural material at a rate of
one meter every thirty seconds and can lift and
manipulate up to two metric tons with the aid of
gravitic stabilizers. It has a base Armor Class of
15, including its Dexterity penalty, and 15 extra
hit points. A Sledge has onboard tools equivalent
to a postech tool kit.
Affinity Abilities: The expert operator knows how to
quickly engage the shell’s strength actuators and
can treat its effective Strength modifier as +3.
When it moves, it can burst through any standard
interior-grade wall or light external construction
as part of its movement. Its effective hit point bonus is 25 instead of 15.

Synth

Some mechanical shells are built to be almost indistinguishable from more organic shapes, and the Synth is
one such android form. A Synth is indistinguishable
from a human without a medical examination or significant physical trauma to reveal its artificial workings.
While a normal human shape is the baseline for a Synth,
it is possible to build models with far more exotic and
fanciful configurations that still appear organic.
Attributes: Strength 12, Dexterity 12, Constitution 12
Basic Abilities: A Synth does not suffer the usual mechanical shell penalty on Charisma skill checks,
and can pass in areas where overtly mechanical
shells might draw unwelcome attention. Their
base Armor Class is only 10, however. A Synth’s
artificial nature becomes obvious if it is reduced
to zero hit points.
Affinity Abilities: A practiced Synth user can maximize their mechanical advantages, raising both
Strength and Dexterity scores to 14, and gains a
bonus 5 hit points.

258• THE NET AND DIGITAL SHELLS

THE NET AND DIGITAL SHELLS
Most individual habitats and polities maintain a local
Net, a network of digital connections and databases that
can be accessed anywhere in that same habitat or territory. Each Net is usually carefully secured against any
external access; it’s possible to send text messages or
video between different Nets, but VR access, database
connections, or other more involved manipulations are
impossible without an inside agent in the target Net
able to knock a hole in the firewalls by hacking a comm.
Most Net use is instinctive and effortless to locals. They can call up public information, send messages, and interact with control panels as an On Turn
action without any need to handle a physical interface.
Only completely and aggressively unmodified shells are
without a basic Net interface, a status usually reserved
for prison shells and those designed for deep-cover operations in polities that reject modification. Even these
shells can interact with the Net provided a dataslab or
similar physical interface is available.
Most automated systems can be operated via Net
interface, and it’s often theoretically possible to hack
them if Net access is available. Many shells have “admin
rights” over one or more systems, allowing them to
operate them automatically with no chance of failure.
Those with “root access” to a system can grant or remove admin rights from other shells. These rights are
specific to shells, not souls, so if a shell is destroyed its
inhabiting soul will need to get these rights re-applied
to their new corpus. Conversely, someone who is able
to steal an authorized shell or coerce its owner can use
it to subvert a system’s security.
Each individual Net is made up of a vast number
of real and virtual “places”. It includes all the physical
terrain claimed by the polity that runs the Net, and also
vast regions of purely virtual existence within the local
area’s computing clusters. It’s a largely trivial exercise
to observe public places, whether real or virtual, but
gaining access to private physical locations or restricted
virtual locations is a task that requires physical infiltration or competent hacking. Many of the most important infrastructure locations or highest-security virtual
locations are physically disconnected from the wider
local Net, and require physical intrusion into specific
areas in order to hack them.
Most Nets are exclusive over a particular area of
physical space, with only one Net operating in any given location. Some crowded areas may have more than
one Net active, however, each one run by a different
polity or private group. Security-minded polities discourage this sort of thing, as any Nets that physically
overlap in coverage area allow digital shells in one Net
to operate in any others in the same physical place.
Such overlapping jurisdictions make for a hotbed of
hacking attempts, with shells based out of friendly Nets
making assaults on less-loved neighbors.

Digital Shells

Digital shells are by far the cheapest and easiest shells
to create, costing only 10 Face at most and requiring
nothing more than a sufficiently advanced computing
node and adequate power to run it. When a person
purchases a digital shell, they are actually just acquiring rights to the local computing power necessary to
instantiate it. Habs with sufficient excess computing
power can simply assign any amount of it needed to
run free digital shells.
Digital shells are extremely difficult to truly kill. If
a shell is destroyed, its computing node can reinstantiate it and its soul with an hour’s computation, bringing
it back with all the memories it had at the time of its destruction, albeit any programs or data files it had in its
“inventory” at the time are destroyed. To permanently
kill a digital shell, its computing node must be hacked
or destroyed, a process that usually requires gaining
access to some of the best-protected areas of a habitat.
Digital shells do not have physical attributes. Their
hit points are equal to the soul’s unmodified hit points.
Any damage to a soul is repaired automatically after one
hour without further trauma.

Loci and Systems

A digital shell is an inhabitant of a single Net. Its soul
is supported by system hardware somewhere in the
bowels of the machine, but its awareness and focus, or
its “Locus”, is restricted to physical or virtual locations
within the reach of that local Net. Usually, this consists
of a single space habitat or the territory on a planet
under the control of a single polity.
It’s possible for a soul to transmit itself to a different Net in two circumstances. If their home Net physically overlaps with another one, they can operate in any
region that overlaps. Lacking that, they can transfer to
an outside Net provided the soul has access to a digital
shell there and someone on the other side opens up
a viable transmission path for the soul. This process
takes five minutes for a local transmission on the same
world or region of a solar system; longer-distance interplanetary transmissions are impractical due to comm
lag. Once complete, the soul inhabits the destination
shell on the target Net and its original shell goes inert; the computing hardware that would normally be
supporting it is now supporting the existence of the
remote shell.
If someone cuts off the communication link between the Nets by undoing the comm hack or destroying the communications hardware involved, the interloping digital shell dies instantly and re-embodies in
the shell back at its original Net, memories intact but
with any programs or data files in its “inventory” destroyed and unrecoverable.

THE NET AND DIGITAL SHELLS •259
Optionally, the shell can hitch a physical ride in a
“mindbox”, a piece of computing hardware rated to fully
support the soul. If their allies can bring the mindbox
into the target Net’s territory, the digital shell can operate natively in the proximate physical location, as if
it part of the target Net’s normal population of digital
shells. The minibox provides all the necessary computing power to instantiate the shell and let it operate
inside the foreign Net’s jurisdiction.
Once in a net, the digital shell can observe any
public location within the Net’s reach. Most often this
means a literally public location: city streets, common
hab corridors, and the like. Private locations normally
have spy scrubbers and observation locks that prevent
eavesdropping in the area. Note that an allied physical
shell’s Net implants always count as public to a friendly
digital shell, allowing them to always see and observe
what their friends are doing even in private locations.
Friends can shut down this access at any time if they
so desire.
Digital shells can monitor multiple feeds, but this
requires about as much attention as watching multiple
viewscreens. They can monitor numerous places for
unusual activity, but they can only really focus on one at
a time. This focus is referred to as a digital shell’s Locus,
the point at which they’re paying attention and able to
influence Net-connected systems in the area.
To hack a system in a private location, it’s often
necessary for a digital shell to send a physical ally close
enough to get their Locus into the right area. No physical connection is necessary; the Locus just has to be in
the same physical area as the target system. Some Loci
are purely virtual, “deep” regions of an internal com-

puting system that may require successful hacking to
reach at all, or public communal VR environments that
any shell can focus on. Digital shells may be necessary
to get anywhere near these “places”.
To hack a system within the scope of a shell’s Locus, the shell rolls according to the usual hacking difficulties on page 54. The shell can only maintain control
as long as they can keep their Locus in the area; while
they can cripple a system or alter a database, they cannot maintain active control over it once they lose access
to the area. Line shunts are not necessary or helpful
in most transhuman sectors; without an active digital
shell to control a hack, the system’s innate defensive
measures will overcome any persistent influence. If
intruders trip any alarms or any guardian digital shells
survive to raise an alert, hacks and database corruption might well be discovered. If they execute the hack
quietly enough, however, their changes may never be
noticed by the owners.
To complicate this task, other digital shells may be
present with the same Locus. If a hostile shell with admin privileges is present with the same Locus, no hack
can be successful until the enemy shell is destroyed or
incapacitated in digital combat. Thus, shell “guardians”
are often the biggest obstacle to hacking attempts, and
would-be interlopers must destroy them to succeed.
While it’s theoretically possible for an organic or
mechanical shell to make a hacking attempt on a system
with portable hacking hardware, their “non-native” reflexes make this far more difficult. All of their hacking
difficulties are increased by +2 and they cannot engage
in digital combat, thus making it impossible for them
to hack systems with an active guardian.

260• DIGITAL COMBAT

DIGITAL COMBAT
When two or more digital shells engage in combat,
the process is much quicker than a conventional fleshand-blood struggle. All combats are resolved effectively
instantaneously once engaged and all combatants act
simultaneously. A shell can drag any number of shells
with the same Locus into combat, forcing all of them to
deal with it before they can perform any other action.
Intruders often do this in order to stifle any guardians
before they can give an alarm.
Digital shells lack physical attributes. Their rolled
hit points are not modified by their shells, and the damage they inflict is based on their Program skill plus any
special programs they may be deploying.
At the start of digital combat, all participants
choose a target. Each soul can only pick one target, but
can be the target of any number of hostile souls.
Each participant then picks an attack mode,
whether to Crush their opponent’s shell, overloading its
processing channels, Muffle the shell, cutting off its data
streams, or Shear the shell, selectively corrupting critical sectors of the shell. A separate response is made to
each shell engaged with them in combat; thus, if three
shells all ganged up on a single target, the single target
would pick one combat mode for its chosen target, and
then pick two more combat modes to respond to the
other two attackers. These modes are chosen secretly,
and revealed simultaneously once all are chosen.
Crush is beaten by Muffle, Muffle is beaten by
Shear, and Shear is beaten by Crush. If the same mode
is chosen by both combatants, no damage is inflicted to
either. Once per combat, a PC with the Expert class can
turn a losing or tied comparison into a successful one.
If the attacker beats the defender, they inflict 1d6
damage on the target, plus 1d6 per Program skill level;
thus, 1d6 total at Program-0, 2d6 total at Program-1,
and so forth. If the defender beats the attacker, no damage is inflicted. A shell can only inflict damage on its
chosen target; if it loses to the target but successfully
beats three other assailants that same turn, it inflicts
no damage on them.
Some shells might be equipped with programs that
allow them to do more damage with particular combat
modes, or resist harm from certain modes, or have additional combat actions. Only one program can affect
each clash, with the chosen program noted at the same
time the combatant writes down their combat mode
and revealed together with their opponent.
Shells reduced to zero hit points are destroyed.
The soul must be re-instantiated in a new shell before
it can act once more, a process that requires an hour.

Shells recover any lost hit points after an hour without
further injury.
Once combat begins in a Locus, it continues until all enemy participants are either destroyed or have
surrendered. A surrendered shell is completely at the
mercy of the assailant, and can be destroyed, released,
or rendered paralyzed and helpless for up to one hour at
the winner’s discretion. Shells locked in combat cannot
raise alarms, alert allies, or do anything other than fight
and make brief communications with other involved
combatants. Shells that have been destroyed require
a full hour to reconstitute themselves and re-embody
their souls.

Digital Programs

Just as physical shells have equipment, so can digital
shells carry programs. Programs can be carried in a
shell’s virtual “inventory” or left as virtual objects in
storage at some Locus. A shell can carry a number
of programs equal to half their Intelligence, rounded down. A soul must have the requisite minimum
Program skill to use a given program or else it’s too
complex or finicky for them to operate. Programs can’t
cross Net borders without a friendly gatekeeper on the
far side. To move programs from one Net to another,
it’s often necessary to download them into physical
storage and manually carry them into the new Net’s
area of operation before allowing a friendly shell to
upload them once more.
Programs can be duplicated easily, but this is a
risky process. Each duplication runs the risk of alerting
the local Net’s autonomic immune system and allowing
it to formulate a counter for the program, making both
copies worthless. To duplicate a program, the hacker
must make an Int/Program skill check at a difficulty of
9 plus the minimum Program skill required to run it;
on a success, they have two copies of it now, while on
a failure, both the original and the copy are destroyed.
If the local Net is “friendly” and fully under the control
of the hacker, there is no risk of this happening, though
simply belonging to the local polity rarely grants this
level of digital impunity. Thus, many hackers prefer
to work in isolated habs where they have full digital
control over their environment.
Programs require a minimum Program skill to
operate them, with the more sophisticated programs
requiring greater skill to implement. Only one program
can be run on any single round of digital combat, the
choice written down next to the attack mode being
used before it is revealed. Each program is listed with
a usual Face cost to acquire a copy from local suppliers.

DIGITAL PROGRAMS •261

COMMON DIGITAL PROGRAMS
Most of the following programs are available in almost
any polity that doesn’t sharply restrict digital shells.
Autofire (Program-1): This program focuses the shell’s
offensive capabilities in a blinding flurry of digital attacks. Hostile shells rapidly acclimate to
this offense, however, and it leaves the shell vulnerable to counterattacks. If Autofire is used in
a round, inflict bonus damage equal to one automatically-successful attack using the current
combat mode, even if that mode would normally
fail against the target’s response. For the rest of
the combat, however, every attack against the operator is always considered successful, regardless
of the combat mode outcome. It costs 40 Face to
acquire a copy of this program.
Clairvoyant (Program-1): A special non-combat program designed for stealthy infiltration, an operator with the Clairvoyant program in their inventory can spend one round in a Locus before
any existing digital guardians or security systems
notice their presence. This does not allow them
to reach Loci they couldn’t normally reach, but
it does let them skip away from a Locus before
guardians can spot them. Once they leave a Locus,
they can’t gain this stealth benefit there again for
another hour. It costs 20 Face to acquire a copy of
this program.
Database (Special): This is not an executable program,
but instead an important data file crusted over
with typical safeguards and anti-intrusion measures. Digital intelligences who need to handle
critical data they’ve looted can treat the important files as a Database program in their inventory.
Kamikaze (Program-1): An extremely dangerous
program favored by veteran hackers who value
speed over safety, Kamikaze automatically makes
the operator’s combat mode a success. However,
it also makes any assailant’s combat mode a success against them, in turn. Thus, in a two-party
combat, both parties inflict damage on each other
when Kamikaze is used. If the operator is being
targeted by multiple hostiles, this program can result in rapid destruction. It costs 40 Face to acquire
a copy of this program.
Mode Boost (Variable): Available for Crush, Muffle, and
Shear attack modes and existing in three ascending levels of sophistication, this program greatly
augments the damage done by that attack mode.
The operator adds twice the program’s level to
each die of damage inflicted by that attack mode
type; thus, Crush Boost-2 adds +4 damage to each
die rolled by a Crush attack. The program has a
minimum skill required equal to its level, and
costs 10 Face per level to acquire a copy.

Mode Shield (Variable): The inverted, defensive equivalent of a Mode Boost program, this decreases
each die of damage inflicted by that attack mode
by twice its rating, ranging from -2 to -6 points.
Thus, Shear Shield-3 subtracts 6 points of damage
from each die inflicted by Shear on the operator.
This can reduce a die’s damage to zero. The program has a minimum skill required equal to its
level, and costs 10 Face per level to acquire a copy.
Multithread (Program-0): A sophisticated utility program, the operator may use more than one program on a single attack. They may simultaneously
run programs with total Program skill minimums
equal to their Program skill. Thus, if they had
Program-2 skill, they could run Kamikaze, which
requires Program-1, and Crush Boost-1, which
also requires Program-1. Only one Multithread
program can be run at a time. It costs 40 Face to
acquire a copy of this program.
Reinforce (Program-1): The shell is hardened against
all digital combat modes. Subtract twice the operator’s Program skill from each die of incoming
damage, down to a minimum of zero. Once Reinforce has reduced damage, however, it becomes
inoperable for the rest of the combat. It costs 40
Face to acquire a copy of this program.
Smokebomb (Program-2): An operator who throws a
smokebomb resolves the combat round. If they
are still alive, they then immediately get one
round to perform a hacking action, even if there
are active guardians in the Locus. If successful, this
hack cannot be countermanded by admin shells
for 1d6 rounds. An operator can throw down a
smokebomb only once per hour. It costs 60 Face
to acquire a copy of this program.
Soul Jar (Special): A soul jar is not a program, per se,
but the data necessary to instantiate a soul. For
cases when a digital shell needs to get a person’s
soul data into or out of an area, it can be treated
as a program in their virtual inventory, and will
be lost if they are “killed”.
Storm (Program-0): This dangerous program allows a
shell to damage multiple assailants at the risk of incurring greater harm. When engaging more than
one enemy, success in an attack mode comparison
allows the user to harm the loser, no matter how
many are engaging them. If an enemy successfully
harms them that round, however, they suffer an
additional 1d6 damage from the attack.
Vampire (Program-1): Hostile computing resources are
siphoned to repair a damaged digital shell. Any
damage the operator inflicts this round heals half
as much in hit point damage they have suffered,
rounded up. It costs 40 Face to acquire a copy of
this program.

262• TRANSHUMAN POLITIES

TRANSHUMAN POLITIES
Even in soft transhuman sectors, conventional struggles over wealth and resources are rare. It is simply too
easy to create mere physical objects, especially if grails
can transmute base elements into whatever material is
needed. Instead, struggles tend to revolve around ideological viewpoints, focusing on beliefs and creeds that
coalesce in the form of polities.
A polity is simply a group of people dedicated to
particular principles. They may be eager enthusiasts
bent on shedding their organic forms, or radical human
traditionalists, or religious zealots who seek new forms
in which to serve God. They might exist to uphold a
tradition of human culture or art, or to explore a specific new mode of being and the possibilities it unlocks.
Others seek a radical reevaluation of human morality,
reconsidering what it means to be virtuous in a world
where human souls can be duplicated and edited at a
whim. Some polities might be jealously exclusive in
their membership, while others tolerate their members
belonging to other polities as well, so long as their goals
are not in conflict.
The more isolated these groups are from the harsh
necessities of mundane practicality, the more drastic
their beliefs tend to be. The need to constantly contend
with an indifferent cosmos just to extract necessary resources for survival tends to dampen the more fanciful
flights of ideological creativity. Once these limits are
broken by the grails, there is much less to constrain a
vision of future existence. The conflicts between these
polities provide adventure seeds in a transhuman campaign, with PCs supporting some against others.

The Work of Paradise

Transhuman polities almost all afford their devotees
with a basic level of sustenance well in advance of any
modern society. Even personal grails are sufficient to
manufacture the necessary resources and expert-system automation needed to provide an ordinary polity
member with everything they might need in the way of
food, shelter, entertainment, and medical care. While
space may be limited in a deep-space habitat, and goods
and services specific to human providers might still be
in short supply, the average polity member may go
their entire indefinite life without knowing a single
moment of true hunger, privation, or want.
One thing the grails cannot provide, however, is a
meaning for these prolonged lives. Many transhumans
spend years or even decades sunk into aimless hedonism, time-killing digital entertainments, or a simple
unthinking repetition of daily existence. Sooner or later, however, most transhumans find a burning need for
some sense of purpose to their lives, some reason for
existence beyond increasingly-tedious amusements and
ever-more-stale novelties of experience. The polities
provide this meaning to their adherents.

The polities are about something that is important,
even important enough to cost their most dedicated
followers their indefinite lives. Pursuing this ideal
promises its believers a sense of meaning and significance that the ten-thousandth virtual orgy or twentieth
orbital-insertion suicide dive can’t provide. For those
transhumans who can no longer bring themselves to
believe in any power higher than their own will, these
polity ideals act as a surrogate religion.

Creating Polities

When building a polity, a GM should start with one or
two rolls on the adjacent table to determine what ideal
drives the heart of the polity. These ideals are simply
examples, but each one indicates the kind of action the
polity pursues and the kind of activity they find hateful.
If the polity is to be useful in the game, it needs to want
things and detest things, and the interaction of these
goals with the rest of the campaign setting will form
the seeds of future adventures. If more than one ideal
is used, you can synthesize them together, or just place
one as more important than the other.
When you have the polity’s core ideal defined, take
a moment to think of a paragraph-sized pitch for the
polity’s ideology. Why would a transhuman want to
be part of this polity? Are they born into it, assuming
it still uses organic reproduction? Is it offering them
some magnificent goal to fire the imagination? Is it
promising to protect them from some threat to their
indefinite happiness? If you can’t come up with a brief,
succinct reason for someone to join the polity, the players are apt to be mystified by its appeal as well.
Decide how much influence the polity has in the
campaign. Do they control a full star system, or are
they a niche group in deep-space habitats? Are they
widespread in other regions? Pick at least one other
polity to be a rival to it, and perhaps one other to be a
sympathetic ally. Write a sentence about each describing the current tenor of their relationship.
All told, you’ll probably need at least five polities
in your campaign, one of which should be moderate
and pragmatic enough to serve as a good default polity
for PCs who don’t want to get involved in the more
dramatic ideologies. Aside from these major polities,
there are likely dozens or hundreds more with at least
a decent cluster of space habs under their control, and
you should feel free to let players come up with them
as part of their PC backgrounds. You might write up
major polities as Factions and reskin assets accordingly.
These polities are going to be the patrons, enemies,
and backdrops for your campaign. While a few patently horrible groups always have a place in a campaign,
many of them should be ambiguous enough in their
ideals that your players will at least be able to entertain
the idea of cooperating with their goals.

TRANSHUMAN POLITIES •263
d20

Vital Polity Ideal

1

Abundant: Society should strive to maximize access to grails and similar material abundance for all members. They
hate material want and love the ideal of maximizing available resources for all.

2

Architect: Grails offer the key to a new era of wonderful creations. Terraformed worlds, massive space installations,
and marvelous devices await their construction. They love building useful marvels and they hate restrictions on
growth or rejection of any constructive technology.

3

Egoists: The human self should be inviolate, and that creating more than one instance of a mind at a time treats
humans as mere instruments to be used. They hate using people as tools and love the individual self.

4

Faithful: Some religion provides vital meaning to their existence and to the world around them. They love obedience to the principles of their faith and they hate things and acts that their religion condemns as abhorrent.

5

Godless: They despise all religions and supernatural thinking and are convinced that humanity was meant to rise
above belief in non-materialistic phenomena. They love ideals of pure rationality and utilitarian efficiency and they
hate beliefs based on religious adjurations.

6

Hedonic: They exist for the sake of personal pleasure and experience, using their shells and the wealth of the
grails to experience new wonders. They love pleasure and excitement and they hate all abstentions and restrictions
against experience.

7

Hierarch: They are convinced that some people are more suited to rule than others, for whatever reason, and
that these people should control society. They love obedience to their chosen elite and they hate defiance of their
ruling caste’s will.

8

Isolationist: They believe that the other factions will contaminate the purity of their society, and contact must
be firmly—or violently—rejected. They hate contact with outsiders and love exalting the excellence and authentic
purity of their society.

9

Liberated: They despise the idea of an elite and believe that society should be built upon decentralized cooperation
rather than submission to a central power. They hate hierarchies of power and they love destroying these hierarchies
and celebrating individual freedom from control.

10

Luddite: They are convinced that transhuman technologies will inevitably doom humanity, and that all of them
should be abandoned. They hate any tech more advanced than standard postech and they love independence from
transhuman technologies such as grails and bodyswapping.

11

Passionist: They believe that with the perfection of the mind and body, perfection of the heart must follow. They
seek love, beauty, enlightenment, and spiritual exaltation. They love human drama and moving artwork and they
hate cold rationality or rejection of personal desires.

12

Perfectionist: Humanity is always intended to be more, improving in mind and body and exploring new ways of
being no matter the cost. They they hate any restrictions on pursuing personal excellence and they love exploring
the frontiers of human capacity.

13

Psionicist: Revere and develop the powers of the mind. While psitech development has not matched conventional
tech’s rate of improvement, they retain many powerful arts. They love the potential within psychic powers and they
hate those that would ignore or reject them.

14

Restrictionist: Society needs to prevent the dangers of reckless use of grails and should restrict their control to a
qualified elite. They hate dangerous use of grails and love the ideal of a worthy technocracy of rule.

15

Selfless: The human mind belongs to itself, and should be altered, duplicated, and used in any way the original
desires. Radical self-authoring of identity is the highest ideal. They hate losing control over their own identities
and love the idea of progressive mental alteration into an individual’s ideal self.

16

Superior: They are simply better than other strains of transhuman, and their inferiors must be eliminated from any
influence on the sector. They hate inferior outsiders and they love demonstrating their own superiority.

17

Swarmer: Their faction must spread at all costs. All efforts must be turned toward creating more shells and more
adherents and seizing more territory. Some in hard transhuman sectors go so far as to create entire groups of ego
duplicates. They love expanding their numbers and influence and they hate valuing the individual over the group.

18

Temperate: Success hinges on the cooperative effort of many factions. They are much more willing to compromise and negotiate than most other creeds. They love building negotiated alliances and they hate uncompromising
extremism, regardless of its supposed virtue.

19

Unchanging: They are adamantly opposed to radical alterations of the human body or mind, believing that such
changes threaten the basic idea of humanity. They hate heavily altered minds and shells and they love the idea of
humanity as it has been known.

20

Xenophile: They desire to abandon their humanity for the sake of becoming some better species. Some alien races
around them may actually have originally been factions of this polity. They love pursuing radically different modes
of existence and they hate adherence to traditional human norms.

264• ONE-ROLL POLITY MISSIONS

ONE-ROLL POLITY MISSIONS
While the conventional adventure seeds earlier in this
book can work fine for building a transhuman adventure, these tables offer some more genre-specific cues
for building the kind of jobs that polities often need to
hire PCs to execute.
First figure out the general direction of the polity’s
interest and identify the thing that’s interesting them.
The basic nature of the mission reveals what it is the
polity needs the PCs to accomplish, while the major difficulty indicates the likely-obvious main problem with
achieving the desired end, though other problems are
likely to be part of it as well. One or more additional
rolls on the transhuman twist table can suggest other
plot twists or genre-appropriate elements to throw
into the adventure.

d4
1

Direction of Interest
Toward a thing mysterious to the polity

2

Toward a thing held by the polity

3

Toward a thing held by a rival

4

Toward a thing held by a neutral party

d12
1

Major Difficulty of the Mission
Powerful military forces threaten the PCs

2

The thing’s location is very dangerous

3

The thing is primed against the PCs

4

The thing itself is dangerous to handle

5

A team of rival polity agents are in it

6

A third force involved in the situation

1

Why PCs are Needed
The last available polity team failed

7

Known involvement would be a disgrace

2

The job needs to be deniable

8

There is a very harsh time limit

3

A PC is somehow related to the thing

9

The thing’s location is not known

4

Everybody better is unavailable right now

10

The PCs are deprived of resource access

5

A polity NPC wants them specifically

11

Critical briefing data is wrong or twisted

6

The PCs are expendable scout resources

12

Getting into or out of there is very hard

d8

d20

Transhuman Twist or Vital Macguffin

1

Basic Nature of the Mission
Scout a believed-to-be-hazardous thing

1

Someone’s identity has been badly edited

2

Destroy the thing in question

2

Someone important is in hiding

3

Salvage or rescue the thing in question

3

A seemingly-benign goal is monstrous

4

Subvert or persuade the thing in question

4

An NPC cares nothing for their shell’s life

5

Build, erect, or instantiate the thing

5

An AI or VI is causing a problem

6

Sabotage the thing and frame a rival

6

Someone’s building or using dire tech

7

Roll 1d6; job changes to that mid-mission
Stop someone else; roll 1d6 for their goal

7

A critical soulstone has been lost

8

8

Grail access to something vital is limited

9

A recently re-embodied NPC has a grudge

d10

The Thing That is the Focus

10

An outside polity is getting involved

d6

1

A populated deep-space habitat
A research or religious complex

11

Obscure polity doctrine is making trouble

2

12

A high-tech experiment has gone rogue

3

A data store or archive

13

There’s a traitor in an important position

4

A military station or complex

14

A war or hostile raid is going on there

5

Valuable land or an important space region

15

A grail is dangerously malfunctioning

6

A defector from the polity or a rival

16

A strange fad or ideology is interfering

7

A celebrity very useful to the polity

17

The desired macguffin is not as it seems

8

Someone important to a polity NPC

18

A traitor in the opposite side offers aid

9

An artificial intelligence or digital shell

19

Normal social expectations are subverted

10

A talented mercenary or agent

20

Someone fights for a near-lost ideology

POLITY MISSION REWARDS •265

POLITY MISSION REWARDS
Many of the adventures a party will have in a transhuman campaign will revolve around doing work for
one or more polities, either the groups that the PCs are
aligned with or simply those outside organizations that
are offering worthwhile rewards. The mission payment
tends to be roughly the same in both cases, as the gratitude of a polity toward a loyal member serves much
the same practical purpose as the indebted obligation
of an outside patron.
The rewards offered by polities to capable operatives are extensive, but the jobs they need done are
not the standard sort of reactor-cleaning jobs that any
low-ranking polity member could manage. The jobs
offered by polity leadership cadres are dangerous, difficult, and often must be deniable. Survival is by no
means assured, and in some cases a suicide mission
might be an assumed part of the work, with reinstantation of a soul in a new shell provided as part of the fee.
The pay a polity offers will depend on its own size
and the importance of the work. Every measure of Face
they offer is the equivalent of so much grail time or so
much work by polity members, and small groups just
don’t have the grails or membership to support huge
payments, even if Face itself is a somewhat notional resource. The rewards offered here are baseline for a major polity with access to at least one major grail. Smaller
groups can likely offer only half as much, or even less.
Reward totals are given in Face here, but if you’re
running a campaign where credits are still in use, you
can multiply the Face rewards by 50 to get the equivalent amount of credits they would likely offer.
Rewards are per-party, divided evenly amongst
the PCs, and often scaled to the highest PC’s level. The
more respected and experienced the mercenary or
member, the more their help is worth.

Simple Jobs

Go someplace relatively nearby and kill someone, destroy something, or collect something. Targets are
not expected to have any defenses sufficient to stop a
professional group, though ugly surprises do happen.
Performing this act is not expected to bring particular
heat down on the group or have lasting negative consequences with their relationship with other significant
polity groups. This work rewards 100 Face/level.

Dangerous Jobs

As a simple job, but there’s reason to believe that the
target may have protection or environmental difficulties that would possibly result in the death of even a
capable and professional group. This level of reward
is also offered for simple jobs that might incur the displeasure of a major polity against the PCs who perform
it. The work rewards 200 Face/level.

Complicated Jobs

The polity needs something done, but isn’t entirely sure
how to accomplish it. The PCs need to go someplace
and use their own ingenuity and understanding of the
situation to bring about the outcome desired by their
patron. Even when these jobs appear to be relatively
safe, they pay well because they require a great deal of
initiative and personal judgment from the operatives.
Any group capable of regular performance of these
tasks will be able to live in the transhuman equivalent
of luxury, with large amounts of personal space, numerous sapient servants or companions, and a wide
selection of shells to use as they desire. Such jobs usually pay 500 Face/level.

Veteran Jobs

At this level of work, the operatives are no longer runof-the-mill mercenaries or standard polity enforcers,
but the proven experts at their trade who are sought
by employers throughout the transhuman sector. Missions for veteran operatives tend to be matters of significant importance to the polity as a whole, with opposition too heavy or too skilled to be overcome by any
ordinary agent. Often the polity sees no way to succeed
at the job, but trusts that experts will somehow figure
out a solution. Up to 10,000 Face/level are regularly
extended to groups capable of this work.

Elite Jobs

Something critically important needs to be done, and
the polity can’t afford to have things go wrong. At this
level, they’re only giving the work to people who have
a demonstrated track record of success, but they’re
also extremely flexible about the remuneration they’ll
offer. Often, as much as 100,000 Face/level worth of
goods or services will be extended to PCs, or equivalent
resources that already exist will be signed over to PC
ownership or placed at their regular disposal.

Critical Jobs

These are tasks where failure threatens vital polity resources, personnel, or the basic survival of the group.
The leadership is unlikely to give this work to anyone
but the most reliable, proven members or allied mercenaries, but they will pay almost anything for successful
completion. Essentially, the PCs tell the polity what
they want, and if the polity can actually give it to them,
they get it. Of course, if they fail the polity may not be
in much of a condition to do anything.

