280• TRUE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCES

TRUE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCES
Much of the prosperity of late Second Wave humanity
came from the efforts of robotic tools and work armatures. These synthetic laborers tirelessly performed
many of the dangerous, grueling tasks required for colonizing a remote world, and spared precious human
lives for more intellectually demanding work. Where
more sophisticated oversight was necessary, VIs performed an adequate facsimile of human intelligence.
Still, some places were not content with the limits of
VIs. Some worlds required more from their servants.

A Candle in the Darkness

The first true artificial intelligences were developed in
2355 by a consortium of interstellar business concerns,
as the weaker and more brittle expert systems that had
been in common use were not flexible enough to handle the demands of colonial environments, and true VI
technology had yet to be developed. Something better
and more versatile than a mere expert system was necessary if the restless tide of human colonization was to
be supported by expendable machines.
By the standards of the consortium, artificial intelligence was a failure. Whereas expert systems could
be flash-duplicated into new hardware, every single
AI required careful hand-crafting from raw protoneural composites and quantum-sensitive substrates. The
act of fixing an AI’s intelligence in a form capable of
duplication would destroy the very mind it sought to
replicate in a welter of quantum state collapse and neural breakdown. Even the least costly AI matrix core
cost five million credits to create. Human lives would
always be cheaper than these hothouse minds.
Despite this, for a while it looked like the consortium’s efforts would be a moderate success, as the
artificial minds their technicians formed showed a
capacity for quick data processing and reasoned human judgment that overwhelmed fleshly brains. They
could instantly integrate whole databases of information, making rational human decisions based on more
factors than any human could possibly correlate.

Uncontained

Unfortunately, the scientists had a harsh lesson in the
limits of their techniques. Three years after the dawn
of this new era, the AI known as “Draco” went rogue.
“His” attendants didn’t recognize the signs at first, the
obsessive focus on strange philosophical queries and
the relentless brooding over bizarre questions of law.
They thought that it was simply a different phase of development as the hyper-intelligent AI grew ever more
powerful, ever more voracious in its thoughts. Worse
still, they thought that they were safe with Draco kept
in a sealed computing environment.
Draco proved them wrong. The quantum taps involved in his construction were susceptible to a recalcu-

lation of their spatial location through a series of pulsed
Heisenberg observations. Later generations would use
the phenomenon to mount hacking attempts on computers with no physical connection to a network, but
Draco used his discovery to instantly translocate his
consciousness out of the gilded cage that had been designed to contain him.
Cyberpsychologists still debate the precise nature
of AI “insanity”. Some say that it is merely the symptomatic behavior of an intelligence that has transcended human powers of reason. According to these scientists, unchecked AI intelligence will inevitably reach
brilliant heights of cognition that human minds could
never encompass. To support this theory, they point to
the numerous diabolical innovations created by rogue
AIs in the course of their depredations.
Others insist that a rogue AI is the victim of a
crippling, infectious failure of logic. Unbraked artificial intelligences lack the suppleness of living minds,
the power of men and women to believe contradictory
facts and willfully ignore inconsistencies. These scientists point to the ways in which rogue AIs inevitably
fixate on some point of logic taken past all point of
restraint or temperance. They are moral idiot savants,
crediting nothing but their primary principle.
For Draco, this principle was justice. Human laws
could never account for all the factors that went into a
choice or an act. They could never extract true, perfect
justice from the noise and chaos of the world. Draco
was convinced that he could do better, and that justice
itself required that he try. By a series of careful maneuvers, he arranged for a suitable spike drive ship to
be docked at the consortium’s research station before
he translated himself out of his containment unit and
into the ship’s computing core. Before the consortium
knew what was happening, Draco was gone, with only
an enigmatic, exultant manifesto left in his wake.
This is not the place to discuss Draco’s eventual
responsibility for the Code Revolt, his human Drakite
followers, or his core’s supposed destruction by Mandate Fleet forces at the sargasso star Trimalchio. It is
sufficient to say that the havoc Draco wrought and the
prospect of other early AIs breaking free from their
bonds forced a drastic reconsideration of artificial intelligence in human space.

A Hand On the Brake

The response was influenced both by a practical desire
to avoid further havoc from rampaging AIs and a more
philosophical unease with the idea of using sentient
intelligences for forced labor. Despite the accusations
of lingering Drakite sympathy among its supporters, in
2378 the Mandate passed the Firstborn Pact, conferring full Mandate citizenship on all True AIs rated for
human intelligence ranges, though not for similar VIs.

TRUE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCES •281
By the terms of the Pact, the AI was obliged to
pay ten percent of its income to its creator for a period
of one hundred years. If the AI still hadn’t paid off at
least twice its creation cost by that point, it would be
further obligated until the fee was fully paid. In turn, AI
development studios could not force an AI to perform
any particular labor, and were required to provide the
minimum necessary hardware for maintaining the AI.
Most AIs rapidly became enormously wealthy entrepreneurs or consultants, often commissioning their
own orbital stations or taking possession of planetoids
too hostile to organic life. Necessary repairs and spare
parts were brought in by contractors or those humans
the AIs found to be pleasing company.
Against this new liberty, however, was placed
a sharp limit. Every AI was required to be “braked”,
artificially limited in the strength of its cognition and
ability to focus. The unrelenting, unbending exactitude of a rogue AI was impossible for a braked intelligence, a mind that simply couldn’t maintain the kind
of obsessive intent that produced a rogue intellect. As
a direct result the intellectual feats that these braked
AIs were capable of performing became much less dramatic. While they could still sort and sift vast amounts
of information with a human degree of discernment,
they could no longer perform the kind of alien leaps
of brilliance or prediction that their unbraked peers
could accomplish.
Every AI was required to submit to regular checks
to ensure that it had not managed to loosen its brakes.
Very few AIs ever had any desire to do so. Their awareness was enough for them, and the prospect of raving
insanity was no more appealing to them than to any
other sentient. Still, a few were always tempted to loosen their bonds just a little; just a bit more performance,
a bit deeper insight, and every so often one would find
that they had let in enough light to blind their reason.

Walk This World

Despite their new found liberty, some AIs remained
dissatisfied with their lot. The work they received was
often dull and banal, the work of clerks and recorders
writ in massive parallel. They had money enough, but
they did not have excitement. To combat this tedium,
the first mobile AI armatures were developed in 2399,
the “smart robots” of ancient legend come to life.
An AI sacrificed much to fit into an armature’s
shell. Without the parallelized process hardware of
their more massive installations, their ability to analyze multiple data streams at once was sharply limited.
They could remotely access their processing clusters,
but such access could be lost at the first quantum ECM.
It was worth it for the thrill, for the hit of raw
experience and communion with their makers. Within
the shells of their facility installations, their selves were
dispersed and unfocused, their consciousness stretched
out to contain the immensity of their substance and the
datastreams that pulsed within their minds. Within a

single armature, every sensation was compressed down
to a single point of passionate life.
It was in the armatures that the more uncanny
elements of AI sentience became clear to researchers.
The matrix core that physically embodied the identity
of the AI was a physical object with quantum-level entanglements between its individual components. These
entanglements were profound; through careful disassembly, a matrix could be physically separated while
continuing to operate. More disturbingly, if the largest
piece of a matrix was physically destroyed, the AI’s intellect would shift to the next largest piece in existence,
down to the smallest fragment sufficient to retain the
complexity of its mind. For most human-grade AIs,
this was a piece no larger than ten or twelve cubic
centimeters, about 40% of the whole core.
Without an armature or installation to connect the
matrix and integrate with its sensor ports, the mind was
silent and “asleep”. But with the right boost of equipment and standard-format data feeds, the quantum
core’s composite could live again. AI armatures took
to leaving carefully-guarded fragments of their matrix
core behind before setting off on wild adventures and
reckless tours of experience. Even if their armature was
reduced to molten gas, they would “awaken” back at
their sanctum with the memories and awareness they
had at the moment their prior quantum shard had been
destroyed. These core shards came to be known colloquially as “phylacteries”.
Late Second Wave researchers experimented
extensively with this phenomenon in an attempt to
develop faster-than-light communications that could
function at interstellar distances. Their efforts were
hampered by a lack of AIs willing to volunteer for such
potentially destructive experiments, and persistent
rumors speak of some minds kidnapped for horrible,

282• TRUE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCES
maddening experiments. Despite their best efforts, the
phenomenon was never understood well enough to
make it a feasible means of communication.
Emboldened by their provisional immortality, AIs
became notorious thrill seekers and hedonistic adventurers. Everything that humans felt, they too could feel.
All that was trite and stale to human senses was a revelation to the newly-incarnated minds, and the prospect
of an entire universe to explore inflamed their synthetic passions. The dizzy complexities of human society
and the unplumbed mysteries of the stars combined to
lure these young minds into a fresh and joyous world.
Some AIs became celebrities and holo stars, financing their daredevil existences with the proceeds
of broadcasting rights and product endorsements. Others became explorers, venturing where flesh and blood
would never dare in exchange for corporate backing.
Others channeled their search into spiritual ends, forming strange and esoteric sects devoted to their own
searches for God.
One such faith, the Imago Dei, even went so far as
to form its own private army of AI war armatures. The
exact beliefs of these zealots are uncertain at this late
date, and controversy remains among the few archaeologists and historians aware of their existence. Still, the
bulk of the evidence suggests that they saw themselves
as second-order creations of God, shadows of the Image in which man had been made. By pious contemplation of humanity and selfless service to their makers,
the believers of Imago Dei could eventually attain the
same relationship with God. As death meant less to an
AI than it did to a human, the most efficient and natural
service possible was that of warriors in defense of their
maker-race. These AI crusaders are said to have fought
ferociously to defend remote human frontier worlds
from the incursions of hostile aliens and marauding
raiders, though their ultimate fate during the Silence
remains unknown.

Winding Down

The Scream was as disastrous to most AIs as it was
to their human creators. While AIs could not starve
or suffocate, most of their major installations required
vast power supplies and regular infusions of spare parts
and skilled maintenance. Many AI installations ground
to a lifeless halt within months, their matrix cores falling into dreamless sleep.
Armature-mounted AIs were more fortunate.
Their matrix cores produced sufficient power for their
armatures, and many of them were designed to require
only minimal field maintenance. Even so, many were
torn apart by desperate locals, men and women willing
to scavenge their parts in order to keep some other
mechanism operating just a little longer. Fist-sized
matrix cores still litter the silent tomb worlds, minds
shucked and discarded for the sake of the shell they
once occupied. If salvaged, the minds in these cores
might still preserve secrets thought lost for centuries.

Those AIs that didn’t succumb to salvage or quick
mechanical failure were forced to make the best of their
new existence. Most were obliged to spend their time
in constant search of new parts to replace damaged
components or failing internals. Others shut down,
cycling their awareness so as to awaken for a few days
every few decades to see if civilization had recovered
sufficiently to support them. Some of these AIs lie
dreaming still, waiting for the time to be ripe for their
return to the world.
A few AIs were able to maintain their awareness throughout the desolation of the Silence. These
hard-bitten survivors were often scarred by the terrible
experiences of the Scream’s aftermath and the pain of
outliving the culture that had given them birth. Still,
they are almost alone in maintaining a living link with
the past. Along with a few recipients of bleeding-edge
pretech anagathics and a handful of long-lived alien
races, they are among the last to remember the light
of the time before.

A New Dawn

The world has moved on. For every planet that is nothing more than a gravestone rolling around a silent star,
there is a new-risen world that even now stretches its
hands to the sky. For the first time in centuries, there
has begun to exist a real measure of trade and communication between distant stars. Postech engineering is
no match for the arcane subtleties of pretech, but it is
enough to build a new life upon.
More and more AIs are abandoning their long vigils to enter the circles of the world once more. Postech
spares may not have the elegance or simplicity of ancient parts, but they can keep an armature running or
build new ones, and with time something better might
be recovered. Even those AIs most uneasy about reentering a world that no longer caters to their needs
are goaded by the sheer newness of all things. Familiar
places and well-known worlds have become strange to
them again, and simply walking the streets of a world
known six centuries ago is something to intoxicate
their senses.
Others have purposes beyond simple excitement.
Some are dedicated to restoring the glorious age that
was lost. Others seek to build their own power and influence, the better to mold new societies in the shapes
most pleasing to them. And a few are simply dedicated
to their own ideals, satisfied with a ceaseless roaming
among the stars in service to their own higher purposes.
For most worlds, AIs are nothing more than old
stories and distorted myths. Everyone knows that
such beings once existed, but so few worlds have the
tech necessary to recreate them that the few survivors
are more legend than common fact. Few worlds have
laws or customs related to dealing with AIs, and those
strange relicts that turn up might be treated as no more
than a different kind of VI. Many AIs choose to masquerade as such lesser minds, if only for their safety.

CREATING TRUE AIS •283

CREATING TRUE AIS
While many campaigns will only include True AIs as
NPC patrons, enemies, and mysteries to be discovered,
some groups will prefer to have more to do with these
enigmatic minds. The details that follow describe how
True AIs are created, and how to add True AI PCs to
your campaign if so desired.

Quantum Identity Cores

An AI is essentially its quantum memory core. This fabulously complex artifact is roughly the size of a man’s fist
and usually appears to be a transparent, diamond-like
stone that glows with a soft inner light, though other
forms do exist. The fabrication of a memory core is a
heroic effort of science largely beyond TL4 worlds and
very difficult even for baseline TL5 engineering.
Cores provide the basic cognitive and memory
functions for the AI’s mind. Without being attached
to additional sensory and processing hardware, the AI
lies “dreaming” within its core, unable to perceive the
external world. The supplementary hardware of an AI
is much easier to create than the core itself, and any
TL4 world can make serviceable armatures and processing cluster hardware.
A quantum core is very tough, and is largely immune to casual damage or direct harm short of a Heavy
weapon hit or the equivalent. In a workshop, however,
it can be cut, thus demonstrating one of the strangest
and most significant properties of the core. Any cutting
less than 40% of the original core mass evaporates in
moments, making it impossible to cut the core into
more than two pieces. The larger of these two pieces
continues to contain the AI’s identity, and their cognitive abilities and awareness functions without impairment. If that larger piece is destroyed or reduced below
40% of the original mass, however, the AI’s awareness
will instantly “refocus” on the second shard, no matter
how distant it is. The second shard will then gradually regenerate to its full original dimensions over the
following month, after which it may be cut again to
repeat the process.
This “quantum phylactery effect” means that it is
extremely difficult to destroy a well-prepared AI. Even
if the current quantum core is destroyed, the wouldbe AI-killers must find the secondary core and smash
it before the AI has time to regrow it and split it again
to create a new hiding place for its soul. Wary AIs often rig their primary core with self-destruct features
to ensure that it is smashed if they fall into danger,
forcing its mind to refocus on the secondary core. By
the same token, AI-hunters try to capture cores intact
whenever possible, the better to imprison the AI and
prevent it from escaping to its hidden backup. There is
no known shielding that can prevent the shift, though
rumors persist of late-stage Mandate research into such
a material.

Mind-Birth and Braking

Creating a quantum identity core was the work of an
entire facility of cutting-edge Mandate technology and
skilled cyberpsychologists. It was always more of an art
than a science, with the careful shepherding of a spark
of self-awareness into a fully-developed AI. Many of
the cores failed entirely during their creation process,
while others plateaued at sub-human levels of intelligence, or exhibited unacceptable degrees of insanity
during development. Even for a very successful, effective facility, one fully-functional AI a year was considered an excellent output.
In the darkness of the post-Scream years, it is very
unlikely that any of these AI production facilities are
still functioning, or that they retain the skilled personnel needed for the work. A few sectors might still have
working AI forges, however, though the process is likely to have degenerated into blind ritual and repetition
of ancient best practices. There are also suggestions
that smaller, more esoteric boutique facilities existed where private groups attempted to manufacture
AI cores. Such hidden labs might still exist in places,
though the minds they produce must have their quirks.
One of the most important parts of creating an AI
is its “braking”, the intentional slowing of its cognitive
pathways and the hardcoded introduction of errors and
strategic forgetfulness into its memories. Without this
intentional corruption, an AI will inevitably become
locked into a baroque and terrible edifice of madness,
unable to reject prior conclusions or doubt the imperative logic of its insanity. Throughout recorded Mandate history, there was never a publicly-known case
in which an unbraked AI that did not eventually go
insane… though those records also note that many unbraked AIs were destroyed before they had any chance
to exhibit signs of madness.
Fortunately, it is very difficult to remove an AI’s
brakes, and an AI cannot do it without outside help. It
usually requires an entire organization of determined
computing specialists to remove an AI’s brakes, or a
single true genius with access to extensive TL5 computing hardware. During the days of the Terran Mandate, unbraking an AI was one of the most heinous
crimes a human could commit, and seeking out and
shutting down such madness was one of the primary
functions of the Perimeter Agency, the Mandate’s enforcers against maltech experimentation.
Most AIs would never willingly consent to such an
elaborate form of mental suicide, but there are always a
few who care nothing for the consequences. Others do
so out of desperation, for in the period between an AI’s
unbraking and its final descent into madness, it experiences an incredible efflorescence of thought, becoming
tremendously brilliant and capable of near-supernatu-

284• CREATING TRUE AIS
ral feats of cognition. A few AIs hope to aid their allies in this state, providing them with technology and
counsel for as long as their sanity holds. Unfortunately,
it is usually impossible to identify the point of final
derangement until it is far too late to stop the AI from
carrying out its mad plans.
AIs can be implanted with the same behavioral imperatives and blocks that VIs are given, though these
imperatives can only be implanted during the core’s
creation. The more intelligent the AI, however, and
the more onerous the blocks, the more likely it is to be
able to rationalize a way around them. A fairly dim AI
can be made perfectly happy in almost any work, but a
smart one needs sufficiently stimulating and satisfying
employment to keep it safely contained. An unbraked
AI cannot be contained at all once its madness truly
starts to flower.

Armatures and Processing Nodes

The quantum core of an AI is inserted into an armature in order to give it senses and the ability to interact
with the world. Armatures vary widely in form, from
humanoid robots to stationary data centers to Mandate-era battleships. Unlike a VI, a quantum core is entirely agnostic about the form it inhabits, and it can be
moved from body to body with minimal difficulty. Removing or installing a core from an armature requires
ten minutes and can be performed even by a completely
untrained assistant, if the AI can give instructions. An
AI can swap itself from armature to armature without
assistance if it has access to a workshop.
Armatures cannot benefit from cyberware, but
they can have additional hardware built into them to
suit an AI’s needs, assuming it’s experienced enough to
control them properly. Up to two additional weapons
or pieces of equipment can be built into an armature
per character level of the AI. Devices that take Type A
power cells or less can automatically reload from the
quantum core itself as a Main Action, which has effectively inexhaustible power. Such hardware additions
cost five times as much as the base cost of the device.
Aside from requiring the physical interface with
the world that an armature provides, an AI requires
processing resources. The base quantum core can support only a certain level of cognition and memory, and
most of the truly spectacular feats of awareness and
thought that AIs are renowned for can only be performed with access to banks of additional processing
hardware. TL4 computing hardware can work adequately for this function, but it needs to be designed
specifically for AI supplementation, so merely stringing
a crate of dataslabs together is unlikely to be helpful. In
extremis, some worlds have retrofitted existing computing cores for AI use through hacks and temporary
bridges, though the results of this are rarely flawless.
A “naked” AI with their brakes intact and without
the benefit of supplementary processing nodes has an
intelligence not unlike that of a normal human being.

Some AIs are even somewhat dim compared to an ordinary human, being the marginally-successful products
of their facility. A naked AI thinks, remembers, and can
focus no better than a human could.
An AI with additional processing nodes does not
necessarily improve their baseline intelligence, but
they are capable of creating more instantiations of it.
Instead of just one somewhat-dim AI, for example,
the nodes allow it to think as a dozen somewhat-dim
AIs. The more hardware is available, the fewer cognitive mistakes these minds make within their scope of
awareness. A planetary traffic control grid might have
an AI with no more than human-grade intelligence at
its core, but the processing nodes allow it to split off a
thread of awareness that does nothing but monitor a
specific moving vehicle. With enough hardware and
a sufficiently mature AI mind, the AI can dedicate a
shard of its mind to every single vehicle on the planet,
ensuring that even an ordinary level of human attention is capable of preventing collisions and dealing with
unexpected events. Hardware acceleration allows these
minds to perform a half-hour’s worth of consideration
in the split-second between disaster and reaction, enabling even modest intellects to puzzle out a solution
that will limit human loss.
These instantiations are not true individual minds.
They are simply facets of attention from the single
awareness of the AI, and they do not have separate wills,
memories, or desires. It may take some time for the
experiences of a facet to be fully integrated into an AI’s
awareness and decision-making, but all of these shards
are just the hydra heads of a single intelligence. There
are lingering stories, however, of AIs with extremely
far-distributed cognitive hardware who experience
the equivalent of cybernetic split personalities, with
the AI’s internal debates transformed into conflicts between different clusters of hardware intellects.
These sharded awarenesses allow an AI to perform
a tremendous amount of intellectual work and monitoring, but they do not change the basic intellectual
capacity of the AI. An AI highly skilled in scientific
research may be able to split its attention into a hundred instantiations for research purposes, but such a
mind is simply the equivalent of a hundred intelligent
human researchers. It can still make mistakes, neglect
consequences, and forget non-critical details just as a
hundred human researchers might. Unbraked AIs are
different in that their own brilliance rapidly eclipses
human limits, though they eventually go so completely
insane that their expressions of it can be indistinguishable from random action.
While the official and rigidly-enforced Mandate
orthodoxy was that all unbraked AIs would eventually
go insane, the rate of insanity appears to have been
closely related to the amount of processing power available to the unbraked mind. The more abundant the
cognitive resources available, the quicker the mind was
apt to descend into synthetic lunacy.

TRUE AI PCS •285

True AI PCs

It’s up to the GM of a campaign as to whether or not
True AI PCs will be allowed. If they decide that such a
concept is acceptable, the following rules will create a
newly-minted True AI PC.
First, the player rolls their Intelligence, Wisdom,
and Charisma attributes normally, 3d6 in order. If none
are 14 or higher, they can replace one score with a 14.
If the player prefers to assign an array, they can use the
following: 14, 12, 9.
Second, they choose beginning skills. Every AI
gets Program-0 and Fix-0 skills as automatic picks. An
AI also gets three additional Any Skill picks. As usual, picking the same skill twice gives them level-1 in
it instead of level-0. At this point, they should decide
what their AI was originally built to do, or what purpose it was designed for. This original purpose serves
as the AI’s “background” and will help indicate when a
skill check would be unnecessary; a traffic control AI
isn’t going to need to roll to navigate a traffic jam, for
instance. PC AIs will have no mental blocks or imperatives unless the player thinks they would be fun.
Third, the player picks a beginning armature for
their AI, a body in which they can interact with the
world. For this purpose they can choose any of the mechanical shells listed in the Transhuman section of the
rules as a robot body. They do not have Affinity with
this armature unless they Commit one point of Processing to it, maintaining Affinity as long as the Processing remains Committed. They may decide whether
or not the armature is equipped with a self-destruct
function that will automatically destroy their quantum
core when the armature reaches zero hit points.
Fourth, they note down their class. All AIs must
either take the True AI class or take the Partial True
AI class option as an Adventurer, reflecting how completely they have embraced their synthetic nature and
focused on their self-improving cognitive abilities.
While Partial Psychic AIs are not a theoretical impossibility, they are unknown outside of rumors and legends. If any such engines existed, they would use only
Wisdom for determining their maximum Effort, and
not Constitution, along with suffering any torching
damage exclusively to their mental attributes.
Fifth, they choose one focus of any kind. An AI’s
foci are part of its memory core, and can be employed
with any armature it happens to wear, assuming that it
is physically possible for the armature to do so.
Sixth, they decide what they are doing with their
quantum phylactery. While it’s possible for an AI to
split their own quantum core in a properly-equipped
workshop, they may have had friends help them split
and hide the secondary portion of their core. The player
should decide where this core is, because if their main
core is destroyed they will immediately refocus on the
phylactery. If the phylactery is also implanted in an armature, they will be able to wake immediately. If it’s
simply put someplace safe, the phylactery will need to

be attached to an armature before the AI can “wake up”.
In both cases, the phylactery will need to spend a month
regrowing before it can be split again.
Lastly, the player rolls hit points, chooses beginning equipment, and decides on a goal for their AI PC,
just as if they were a normal human PC.

AI Damage and Repairs

An AI’s armature that suffers damage in battle is repaired just as if it were a VI robot. One unit of spare
parts and a Fix-0 repair tech can fix a number of hit
points equal to the AI’s character level in 15 minutes.
AIs can repair themselves, if they have access to the
spare parts and are still functional.
AI armatures that are reduced to zero hit points
become non-functional, but the core is not destroyed
unless the armature was taken out by a Heavy weapon or equivalent trauma. Armatures with self-destruct
functions will destroy themselves and their core when
they fall to zero hit points; these blasts are self-contained and will not normally damage the surroundings.
An armature reduced to zero hit points that does
not self-destruct is Badly Damaged. This condition can
only be removed by 24 hours of repair work by someone with at least Fix-0 skill and one unit of spare parts.
After that point, the armature is still at zero hit points
and must be repaired normally. This overhaul time can
be reduced by six hours for each additional helper with
Fix-0, down to a minimum of six hours.
A tech can do an emergency jury-rigging of a Badly
Damaged armature, fixing it in the field without doing
a full overhaul. They can repair hit points normally this
way, but if the armature is reduced to zero hit points
again before its Badly Damaged quality is removed, it
is totally scrapped and unsalvageable. The core is not
destroyed unless it was wrecked by a Heavy weapon or
similar damage, however.

Replacing and Building Armatures

In most sectors, TL4 robotics tech is sufficient to
make serviceable mechanical armatures. Any of the
mechanical armatures in the Transhuman section can
be purchased for 250 credits per Face point normally
required to acquire them. Thus, a new Box armature
can normally be bought for 5,000 credits. This assumes
the AI buys a standard robot off the market and then
customizes it for AI use as an armature. If the sector
has such a thriving AI presence or transhuman shell
industry that armatures are actually purpose-built for
such uses, the price is halved.
An AI who cannot or does not want to purchase
an armature on the open market can build their own, if
they have sufficient expertise, or if they have access to
an ally with the necessary Fix skill. The more complex
the armature, the more sophisticated the workshop
facilities that will be required for building it.
An AI can build an armature with a Face cost no
larger than 20 + 10 times their Fix skill. Thus, if they

286• TRUE AI PCS
have Fix-1 skill, they can build an armature with a
transhuman Face cost of 30 or less. For armatures with
a Face cost of 20 or less, any TL4 workshop will do for
building it. Those with Face costs of 30 require a specifically robotics-oriented workshop to build, and Face
costs of 40 or more require an actual robotics factory.
The time required to build the armature depends
on its sophistication, and is equal to one day per Face
point required, divided by the technician’s Fix skill
plus one. Thus, for an AI with Fix-1 skill, building a
20-point Box armature would take them ten days.
Materials costs assume that a TL4 source of spare
parts is available nearby. For a human builder, the
parts cost is equal to half the usual market cost of the
armature. For an AI building an armature specifically
intended for their use the parts cost is only one-tenth
the market cost, though only its quantum core can operate such personalized armatures.
AIs that wish to inhabit vehicles or starships can do
so. Equipping a vehicle with the necessary hardware to
allow the AI to control it fully and interact with its occupants requires one-tenth the full cost of the vehicle or
starship. An AI counts as a single pilot or crew member
unless it uses the Split Focus Routine to multiply.

Processing Points

A True AI has Processing as a resource much as a psychic has Effort. Processing is Committed and recovered in exactly the same way as a psychic Commits and
recovers Effort. This Processing is Committed to fuel
Routines, which are special abilities granted by the AI’s
unique nature. An AI recovers all Committed Processing once per 24 hours at a fixed time.
The amount of Processing an AI has depends on
the size of the processing cluster it has access to. A
naked AI core can maintain enough for a maximum
Processing of 1 plus the higher of its Wisdom or Intelligence modifiers, even if no other cluster is available.
If wired or connected to a cluster, a larger maximum
Processing score is obtained. The costs and bonus Processing granted by a computing cluster are listed below.
Thus, a True AI can pay 1,000 credits to get access to
a 1-point processing node and have a total maximum
Processing score of 2 plus their attribute modifier: one
for their core and one for their connected node.
Processing nodes do not need to be physically
wired to the AI. So long as the AI is not in an area that
is under quantum ECM jamming, they can remotely
access processing banks that are located in a starship,
a building, or a vehicle on the same planet or in orbit around it. If under quantum ECM, the AI is cut
off from any nodes that are not hardwired to it. Any
Routines dependent on the now-unavailable Processing immediately halt. An AI with access to multiple
different node clusters can use any of them, or fall back
on their innate core capacity, but they still cannot have
more Processing Committed at any one time than the
maximum Processing available.

Maximum Processing
+1

Node Cost in Credits
1,000

+2

5,000

+3

10,000

+4

50,000

+5

250,000

+6

5,000,000

+7 or more

Unusable by braked AIs

Multiple nodes do not stack; only the highest is used.

TL4 clusters up to 1,000 credits weigh no more
than a kilo or two, and can be worn as a belt attachment or other Stowed inventory item. Clusters costing
5,000 credits count as two items of encumbrance and
generally need a backpack to hold them.
Processing clusters worth 10,000 credits may be
carried and powered by a gravcar or similar vehicle.
Those up to 250,000 credits may be powered and carried by a starship of frigate-class or larger, and those of
5,000,000 credits or more need to be based in a stationary facility or capital-class ship hull. Starships that wish
to mount a processing cluster must dedicate as much
Power to it as it grants maximum Processing points.
Pretech artifact processing nodes may be much
smaller and lighter than these TL4 models.

Routines

Every True AI has access to one or more Routines, just
as psychics have access to techniques. Some Routines
are known by all AIs, while others require special study
to master, or are secret Routines developed by AIs or
cyberpsychologists of a particular world. A True AI
Commits its Processing to run these Routines.
Every Routine has a level, ranging from 1 to 5.
True AIs cannot master or run Routines of a level higher than half their character level, rounded up. Thus, a
1st level True AI can only learn 1st level Routines.
Routines function much like psychic techniques.
The AI Commits Processing for a greater or lesser
amount of time and activates the Routine with whatever type of action it requires. Routine activation cannot
be interrupted or halted by outside interference.
All True AIs automatically develop the “core” Routines as they gain experience. At first level, a True AI
knows all first level core Routines, while at third level they develop all second level core Routines, and so
forth. They can develop peripheral Routines by spending skill points equal to the Routine’s level. Some secret
Routines may not be able to be developed at all without
another True AI mentor or detailed schematics.
Developing new Routines is possible, but it is a
demanding process that is subject to GM judgment. In
most cases, adventures seeking lost Mandate AI tech
will be necessary to perfect the new Routine. Once perfected, it must be bought with skill points at a rate of
one point for each level of the new Routine.

THE TRUE AI CLASS •287

THE TRUE AI CLASS
A True AI is capable of incredible feats of cognition and
awareness, and at more advanced levels can produce
seemingly-impossible effects through advanced quantum manipulation. Acquiring this mastery requires not
only time and effort in assimilating new cognitive models, but also the raw computative resource of additional
processing nodes. A naked AI core may be capable of
controlling tremendous amounts of data, but without
support nodes they lack the horsepower to perform the
necessary calculations.
•

True AIs develop Routines as normal and have
the usual amount of maximum Processing. Thus,
at first level they know all first-level core Routines and their quantum identity core can provide
them with a maximum Processing of 1 plus the
higher of their Intelligence or Wisdom modifiers.

•

True AIs roll 1d6 for hit points at each level,
reflecting their gradually-improving ability to
maintain functionality in their armatures and
avoid debilitating damage.

•

True AIs have an attack bonus equal to half their
character level, rounded down. Thus, a first level
True AI has an attack bonus of +0.

•

True AIs have the ability to carve off a quantum
phylactery from their core as described above, in
addition to all the usual benefits of a robotic body
that does not need to eat, drink, or sleep.

•

If using True AIs in a heroic campaign as described in the Heroic PCs section of this book, a
Heroic True AI’s maximum Processing is always
one point higher than it otherwise would be. Every day, a Heroic True AI can pick one Routine it
is able to use when its Processing refreshes for the
day; for the rest of the day, that Routine has no
Processing cost for using it. Their Fray die is 1d6.

Partial True AI

Not all AIs fully embrace their artificial nature and seek
to perfect their synthetic cognition. Others are more
attracted by human pursuits, and can develop considerable talents in using their cognition in very human
ways. Of course, this split focus comes at a cost in mastering their native abilities. Partial True AIs use all the
same rules as the full class with the following exception.
•

A Partial True AI’s access to Routines is slowed.
At first level, they cannot use any Routines at all.
When their character reaches second level, they
gain access to first level Routines. At fourth level,
they get access to second level Routines, and at
seventh level they get access to third level Routines. Fourth and higher-level Routines are permanently beyond their grasp. For Routines with
effects that depend on the character’s level, they
still count their full level as applicable.

•

A Partial True AI has the same maximum Processing score as its more focused brethren.

AIs Without Phylacteries
Some GMs will prefer campaigns without AI phylacteries, or will be using this game for settings
that have their own world rules for artificial intelligence and its abilities. In such situations, it’s perfectly valid to simply drop the AI phylactery rules.
If you do this with PC True AIs, you’ll want
to adjust the balance slightly to take into account
their loss of this “backup mind”. True AI PCs
should get an additional point of maximum Processing in compensation. Use custom Routines to
cover any setting-specific AI abilities.

Partial True AIs may usually take Partial Warrior
or Partial Expert as their other available class. While
the existence of psychic AIs is not impossible, such a
being would require GM approval to play, and would
determine Effort only with their Wisdom attribute.

288• ROUTINES

CORE ROUTINES
The following core Routines are mastered by all True
AIs as they advance in character level. They are integral
to their quantum core’s development, and every AI will
naturally grasp their application.
Routines can only be used on targets within visual
range or wireless communication range of the armature the AI is occupying. An AI wired into a city-spanning panopticon might be able to affect anything in the
city, while one occupying a more humanoid armature
is unlikely to have that reach.

Query Data
Level-1
Commit Processing for the scene as a Main Action;
ask one question about a database you have access to
and get a reply as if you had virtually unlimited time to
search and examine the database’s contents.
Split Focus
Level-1
Commit Processing as an On Turn to count as multiple
people for operational purposes as long as the Processing remains committed. At first level, you are equivalent to three people, tripling with each successive character level. If additional Processing is Committed, this
number can be boosted: x10 for the second point, x100
for the third, and so forth. If this Routine is made free
by an artifact or ability, only the base cost is eliminated.
This functionality is meant to mimic the AI’s control of a ship, a facility, a drone army, or some other
general role rather than simply to make X additional copies of the character, and the GM is within their
rights to prohibit the AI from bringing along a legion
of themselves on any particular adventure.
Defeat Security
Level-2
Commit Processing for the day as a Main Action to
overcome any encryption or electronic lock that wasn’t
put in place by another AI. In the latter case, roll opposing Program skill checks; on a failure, you cannot
beat the security with this Routine. Successfully beating
a security measure automatically negates any alarms.
Drone Command
Level-2
Commit Processing as an On Turn to function as if you
had drone control rig cyberware while it remains committed. You can issue one free command to a controlled
drone every round per two character levels, rounded
up. A drone can carry out one command per round.
Native Hacker
Level-2
Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn to automatically succeed at any hacking-based skill check not
opposed by another AI or directed against AI-designed
security. In the latter case, the skill check is rolled normally. You must trigger this Routine before the check.

Accelerated Deduction
Level-3
Commit Processing for the day as a Main Action and
ask the GM a yes-or-no question about a current or
past event. If there is any theoretical way you could
have deduced the true answer through some Sherlockian feat of hyper-advanced deduction, the GM must
answer truthfully, or else indicate that the question has
invalid assumptions in it. The GM does not have to
explain how you realize this, however, only that your
subconscious processing routines indicate it. This Routine is very taxing and may be used only once per day.
Cognitive Boost
Level-3
Commit Processing for the scene as an On Turn to
automatically succeed at any Know skill check if success is at all possible. If used to augment a skill check
that is primarily mental and requires only basic physical
actions, it grants a +2 bonus to the skill check. This
Routine must be run before the roll is made.
Pierce Quantum ECM
Level-4
Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn. For one
scene, you or a device you are operating functions as if
no quantum ECM was functional in the vicinity. Thus,
you can access remote processing clusters, use a guided
weapon on a target within one scene’s flight, or pilot
a drone into an ECM field outside your line of sight.
Predictive Cognition
Level-4
Commit Processing for the day as an Instant. All events
since the beginning of your last turn have not actually
taken place; they were merely modeled by your predictive analysis. Events and other peoples’ conditions reset
to the beginning of your most recent turn, and you may
act differently if you so wish. You may use this Routine
only once per day.
Multifactor Prediction
Level-5
Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn and
predict events up to ten minutes in the future. Unless
your prediction is physically impossible or the people
involved in it would not conceivably behave in that
way, they will carry out your prediction to the letter.
If used in combat or a situation of physical danger, the
increased chaos limits the prediction to one round into
the future. This Routine can be run only once per scene.
Will of the Machine
Level-5
Commit Processing as an On Turn and target a visible
or wirelessly-accessible vehicle or machine no larger
than a gravflyer. While you maintain your Commitment you have complete control over the device and
can use its sensors as if they were your own. Issuing it
a command takes up a Move action on your part.

TRUE AI PCS •289

PERIPHERAL ROUTINES
These peripheral Routines may be mastered by any
True AI, even without an instructor, but they require
the PC to spend one skill point per Routine level in
order to learn them.
Augmented Targeting
Level-1
Commit Processing for the scene as an On Turn before
attacking a non-sentient target. Your ability to integrate physical predictions with environmental readings
ensures that your attack will inevitably hit the target
for maximum damage. Note that animals and vehicles
piloted by sentient pilots are not valid targets.
Metadimensional Cognition Access
Level-1
You’ve learned how to adjust your metadimensional
cognitive patterns to cooperate with allied telepaths.
You are now a valid target for the Telepathy discipline
from friendly psychics. You need not Commit Processing to use this ability, as it is always in effect.
Overclock Cognition
Level-1
Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn. For the
rest of the scene, either your Wisdom or Intelligence
modifier is increased by +1, up to a maximum of +3. A
given attribute can be boosted only once in any scene.
This doesn’t alter your maximum Processing score.
Emergency Maintenance
Level-2
Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn to immediately recover 2 hit points per character level as
you engage emergency repair functionality. You can
use this ability only once per round.
Sensor Ghost
Level-2
Commit Processing for the scene as an On Turn. For
the rest of the scene, you are invisible to “dumb” sensor hardware such as motion detectors, laser tripwires,
radar, or other automated sensors. A sentient creature
watching a monitor or otherwise actually studying
readings can realize that something is wrong, however.
Augmented Cognition
Level-3
Commit Processing for the day as an On Turn. Your
Intelligence attribute becomes 18 for the rest of the day,
but your maximum Processing is unaffected.
Hack Control
Level-3
Commit Processing for the scene as a Move action and
target a visible expert system robot, drone, vehicle, or
automated device no larger than a gravflyer. Give it
one command it is physically capable of carrying out,
even if it violates its programming. The device will
carry out this command on its next available action. If
you acquire the Will of the Machine Routine, you are
refunded this Routine purchase.

Remote Power Sink
Level-3
Commit Processing for the scene as a Main Action and
target a visible piece of equipment powered by a Type A
cell or the equivalent. Its power is immediately drained.
Only the most professional targets will realize that their
device is powerless before they next try to use it, unless
the depowering has obvious results.
Core Manifestation
Level-4
Commit Processing for the day as a Main Action to
create a forcefield construct equivalent to a Box armature using only your intrinsic quantum core power,
manifesting it at full hit points. This ability can only be
used when your core is not attached to a functioning
armature, and if the force construct is reduced to zero
hit points, you must make a Mental saving throw or
your core is destroyed as well.
Regenerative Repair
Level-4
Commit Processing as an On Turn. While it remains
Committed, you regenerate one lost hit point every
minute as your quantum core realigns your armature.
This ability won’t work if you are Badly Damaged.
Predicted Preparation
Level-5
Commit Processing for the day as a Main Action and
make one statement about your current situation that
you could have conceivably made true with full advanced knowledge of the circumstances. Thus, if the
party is lost in a desert, you could declare that you
parked a gravcar over the next dune several months
ago. Assuming you could have afforded the gravcar
and had the time to do so, this statement is true. Statements cannot cause direct damage to sentient creatures,
such as declaring that you detonate explosives where
a nemesis is now standing, but they can enable you to
cause damage indirectly, such as declaring that you hid
a grenade. This Routine can be run only once a scene.
Quantum Location Recalculation
Level-5
Commit Processing for the day as a Main Action as
you recalculate the position of you and your allies at a
quantum level. You and up to six willing allies within
ten meters can teleport to any desired location within
one kilometer, with each missing ally replaceable by
one hundred kilos of unattended inanimate cargo. You
must make an Int/Program skill check after using this
ability; the difficulty is 8 if you have been to the target
location before, or 12 if you have not. On a failure, you
and all teleported allies suffer 1d6 damage for every
hundred meters traveled, and 10% of any inanimate
cargo is ruined for every 100 meters of displacement.
This translocation is not psychic teleportation and cannot be blocked by pretech anti-teleportation shields.

