PSIONICS
Psionic powers first manifested centuries ago in the
wake of the first interstellar flights. Later paraphysicists speculated that something about the exposure to
metadimensional energies incurred in spike drive travel changed these spacers, altering genomes or warping
their energy shadows in a way that changed their eventual offspring. While this theory was never completely
proven, it was demonstrated that psionic powers were
far more prevalent on the frontier, in people who were
descended of starfaring ancestors, than they were on
Old Terra. On most frontier worlds about one in ten
thousand children are born with psychic aptitude,
while Old Terra displayed only a tenth of that incidence.
Psychic abilities initially seemed to be a congenital
curse, one known as “Metadimensional Extroversion
Syndrome”, or MES. Children manifested MES in puberty or early adulthood, after certain critical stages of
brain development opened a channel between their
minds and the churning maelstrom of energies that
boiled in metadimensional space. By a conscious or unconscious act of will, they could release these energies
in various forms. Even so, the passage of unmediated
metadimensional force through unprotected neural tissue almost invariably caused brain damage. Repeated
use of these abilities caused crippling disability, death,
or madness. Most psychics were dead within a few
years after manifesting. A few were able to control their
powers sufficiently to prevent accidental discharges,
but safe, controlled use of these abilities was unknown.
In response, the Terran Mandate initiated the
Psionic Authority, basing it on a terraformed Mars.
Children from throughout Mandate space were carefully selected by the Authority and brought to the institute in order to study and hopefully cure this tragic
condition. Persistent legends speak of horrible experiments and ruthless sacrifices of “test subjects”, but no
proof of such evil ever emerged, and after decades of
study, the Psionic Authority was actually able to produce protocols that allowed controlled, safe employment of psionic powers.
The bloom of psitech development that followed
and the wonders of jump gates and the Second Wave
of human expansion are a matter of history. So too is
the Scream that erupted six centuries ago and granted
every living psychic in human space either violent madness or instant death. The interstellar societal collapse
that followed and the centuries-long Silence between
the stars has been a matter of living memory for many
ill-connected frontier worlds.
With the Scream and the death or madness of every potential psychic tutor, psionics became the horror it once was generations ago. Untrained psychics
suffer under the lash of their own abilities, doomed to
early death if they aren’t fortunate enough to fumble
into a means of damping their own powers. Men and

women of some worlds now fear psychics, not only for
the ancestral memory of the Scream and the chaos that
followed, but also because their only experience with
these unfortunates has been one of uncontrolled power,
madness, and death.
In the past few centuries, however, a few worlds
have managed to resuscitate the ancient psychic protocols and develop metapsionic tutors skilled enough to
train new psychics. For some, it was the fruit of some
discovered pretech wonder that damped psychic energies enough to safely experiment. For others, it was the
product of coldly ruthless experimentation on disposable psychic test victims. A few worlds even retained
some shreds of psychic mastery from the ancient days,
the result of a Scream victim who was lucid enough
to teach pupils, though usually for some demented or
horrible end. Whatever the source, these institutions
provide desperately-desired training for those few afflicted with MES.
These “psychic academies” are scattered widely
throughout the sectors of space, usually based out of
some amenable planetary polity or defensible deepspace habitat. Some academies are exclusively for the
use of a particular nation or planet, while others will
accept anyone who can pay the tuition or satisfy the
interests of their patrons. Most are powerful players in
the local political scene, offering services that mean life
and death to MES sufferers and producing graduates
who are extremely useful to local rulers. Others need
to operate in secret, avoiding the fearful attention of
populations that neither accept nor trust their powers.

Psychic Characters and Training

All Psychic PCs are assumed to have had some sort of
training. They may have received their education at a
world-famous psychic academy on their homeworld, or
been taught in secret by a peripatetic psychic mentor,
but only one in a million psychics has the blind luck and
natural aptitude to develop an intuitive control of their
MES. Of course, it may be that your PC was that one
in a million, but you’ll want to discuss it with your GM.
Psychic training requires from one to four years
to complete, depending on the aptitude of the pupil
and the amount of training support they get from other psychics. Most academies have one or more “deans”
who actually have the metapsionic abilities to dampen
and buffer novice minds. Regular application of their
abilities to the pupils allows the students to safely practice and train with their powers until they’ve mastered
the channeling of the energies. Aside from these deans,
additional psychic tutors can speed the learning process
by demonstrations, technical critique, and “encouragement” of various kinds.
On worlds where psionics are outlawed or feared,
most MES sufferers learn to either conceal their pow-

30• PSIONICS
ers or accept swift euthanasia or exile from a society
that dreads their abilities. Most are unable to do this;
their innate abilities boil out at some inopportune time,
and their true nature is revealed to their grieving family
and neighbors. Those who do learn to contain their
abilities can go their whole lives unsuspected. A few
receive secret teachings from wandering adepts, ones
who can quickly show them how to suppress their
powers. The best and most promising might be taken
as full students by these adepts, shown how to master
their own abilities and eventually teach others as well.
On planets where psionic powers are less terrifying there is always at least one psychic academy in the
solar system that invites pupils. Some charge exorbitant
tuition, but most are supported by governments, private organizations, or successful graduates. Students
are expected to pay for their training one way or another, however; if not in credits, then in service to the
patron on completion of the training. Many psychics
with decidedly non-academic Backgrounds acquired
their experience in the mandatory service period after their graduation. Most psychic PCs will have left
such duties behind by the time they start adventuring,
though a few of them may have departed considerably
in advance of their expected release date.

Psionic Skills

Psionic powers are divided up into disciplines, each of
which has a corresponding skill. Someone with a basic,
functioning expertise in the skill has level-0, while a
true master of the art would have level-4. Only psychics
can learn psionic skills, and they are most often taught
at rigidly-disciplined psychic academies. Attempting to
develop these skills without such formalized training
is almost invariably lethal to the experimenter, though
an exceedingly few natural prodigies sometimes intuitively grasp their principles. Even fewer of these gifted
naturals are able to express their understanding in a
coherent, teachable form.
Some psychics are “unrestricted”. While they usually have a distinct aptitude for one or two disciplines,
they can theoretically learn any of them, and may raise
any psionic skill they choose. Any character with the
Psychic class is an unrestricted psychic. Others demonstrate gifts in only one discipline. While they can eventually master all aspects of that power, they can’t raise
any other psychic skill. Adventurers with the Partial
Psychic class option are such “restricted” psychics.
Attempting to wield a natural psionic aptitude
without proper precautions will almost inevitably
cause death or madness, as the uncontrolled cascade of
MES energies will cause varying forms of permanent
brain damage. Untrained psychics can sometimes get
away with using their powers very rarely, but these natural prodigies rarely have any ability beyond level-1 in a
discipline. Those who use their powers often enough to
gain more practical field experience can expect to end
up dead, crippled, or insane.

Psionic Powers and Techniques

Every psychic who obtains level-0 proficiency in a discipline gains access to its core technique. This technique
varies depending on the discipline, whether it’s physical
translocation with Teleportation or tissue repair with
Biopsionics. The strength of the ability varies with the
practitioner’s skill level; the Psychic Succor provided by
a biopsionicist with level-0 proficiency is much weaker
than that provided by someone with level-4 expertise.
Core techniques improve naturally as the psychic improves their skill level. They do not need to be purchased with skill points or otherwise specially trained.
As a psychic improves their skill level in a discipline, they may also learn other techniques, special
tricks and abilities they’ve refined through practice.
Each time they improve a skill level, they can pick a
new technique from that discipline. Most techniques
have a minimum skill level associated with them, and
the PC can’t pick a technique which requires a higher skill level than they’ve mastered. They also cannot
“save” technique picks for later, either. They must be
chosen immediately after improving the skill.
The techniques listed under the disciplines here
are commonly-known arts that are part of the basic
curriculum of most competent psychic academies. No
special training is required to choose them when a PC
is able to pick a new technique, as the principles were
taught as part of their basic education. Other techniques exist that are more esoteric in nature, and may
require a trainer to educate the PC in their principles
before they can be learned.
Even so, some of the standard techniques might
be selectively restricted by an academy, taught only to
certain pupils. In some cases, this may be due to a sponsor’s restrictions on what kind of abilities they want the
local psychics to possess, while other academies might
consider them fundamentally immoral abilities. Control over the metapsionic technique of psychic tutoring
is particularly strict, as any pupil who has its rudiments
included in their curriculum may eventually be able
to train other psychics in turn. A PC may have to go
to significant lengths in order to patch the holes in a
government-controlled psychic curriculum.
PCs who want to learn additional techniques beyond those acquired by improving their skills may buy
them separately with skill points, paying one point per
level of the technique. PCs who want to retrain techniques may do so at the GM’s discretion, usually only
when they encounter some new esoteric technique
they’d like to learn in place of an existing art. Techniques can only be retrained into others of equal or
lower required skill level.
It may be possible for a psychic to create entirely
new techniques to reflect their personal aptitudes and
special inclinations. Any such novelty is strictly at the
GM’s discretion, and unlikely to be done more than
once or twice over the lifetime of even the most skilled
psychic experimenter.

PSIONICS •31

Effort and Psychic Abilities

Psionic powers are fueled by Effort, a measure of the
psychic’s mental focus, energy, and neural responsiveness. A psychic’s maximum Effort total is equal to one
plus the higher of their Wisdom or Constitution attribute modifiers, plus their highest psychic skill score.
Thus, a psychic with a Wisdom modifier of -1, a Constitution modifier of +2, and psionic skills of Metapsionics-0 and Biopsionics-0 would have a maximum
Effort score of 3. If he were to then improve his Biopsionics skill to level-1, his Effort would become 4.
Effort is “Committed” to fuel a psionic power.
Some Commitment is relatively short-term, lasting
only as long as the power is in effect. Other powers
require that the Effort be Committed for the full scene,
while the most powerful might require it be Committed for the rest of the day. Once the Commitment period is over, the Effort returns to the psychic. All Effort
is refreshed after a good night’s rest.
Whenever a power requires you to Commit Effort,
you commit only one point, though additional effects
or triggerings may require separate Commitments.

Torching

Psychics can push past their limits by “torching”, intentionally ignoring safety protocols and neural refractory
periods to channel MES energy beyond their normal
capacity. For untrained MES subjects, all their power
use qualifies as torching, as they lack the training necessary to develop safe reserves of Effort.
Torching is an Instant action that can be performed once per round. It provides a free point of Effort that lasts for the rest of the scene, even if this point
puts a psychic over the maximum allowed. Every time
the psychic torches, however, they have to roll on the
torching result table below.
d6

Torching Result

1-2

Lose 1 point from your Wisdom score

3-4

Lose 1 point from your Constitution score

5

Lose 1 point from an attribute you choose

6

No harm is done by the torching

Psychics reduced below a Wisdom score of 3 go
violently insane and become “feral psychics”; those reduced below scores of 3 in other attributes likewise
become dead or nonviable as player characters. There is
no available cure for brain damage caused by torching,
and even advanced pretech technology has no generally-known remedy.
Feral psychics are exceptionally dangerous, as their
form of brain damage invariably results in violent, psychotic behavior and terrifying hallucinations. Worse
still, they can torch with impunity thereafter, as the
MES energies have already burnt a clear path through
what remains of their sanity. Feral psychics have effectively unlimited Effort with what powers they have
obtained. There is no known cure for a feral psychic.

Attitudes Toward Psychics

Most worlds have a warily accepting attitude toward
psionic abilities. Provided they’ve received appropriate
training, a psychic can live and work in relative peace.
They are not normally required to wear any sort of
external badge or marking, and they are entitled to
keep their own abilities private from anyone but the
government if they so wish. They may be subject to
mandatory “national service”, depending on the polity, and their special abilities might be impressed by
the government in cases of extreme need, but they are
able to live a relatively normal, if very well-remunerated life. Ordinary men and women have only a vague
understanding of psychic powers, but they understand
enough to know the basic types of disciplines and the
sort of effects each can produce.
Other worlds have a warmer attitude towards psychics. Those gifted with MES are elevated above the
ordinary rabble, their abilities celebrated and directed
toward the advantage of their communities. Such societies often have psychic ability as a prerequisite for
substantial authority, and have worked precognitive
visions or telepathic scans into the ordinary fabric of
life. Offworld psychics tend to be treated with considerable respect on these worlds, though sometimes they’re
also expected to provide services or guidance they may
not be equipped to give. Citizens of these worlds usually have an excellent understanding of how psychic
disciplines work, in addition to understanding ways
to counter them.
A few worlds have outright hostility towards psychics and their abilities. MES sufferers might be viewed
as pitiable victims of a lethal affliction they can’t control, but trained and capable psychics are threats to be
wiped out. Their telepathic probings, cheating foresight, and impossibly elusive teleportation makes them
a menace to normal human beings, and society cannot
tolerate their existence. Some worlds forbid psionics
out of fear of another Scream, while others do so out
of misunderstandings, a desire for social stability, or local conditions that make psionic powers exceptionally
dangerous. A few of these worlds have private psychic
academies to train psionic myrmidons for the ruling
class or deniable agents of private intrigue.
On almost all worlds, however, psychics can expect to suffer considerably harsher legal penalties than
conventional criminals. Some worlds simply have no
resources to jail an unwilling teleporter or mind-reading telepath, while others expect those of great gifts to
have correspondingly great virtue. It’s not unknown
for psychics to face summary execution for crimes that
would earn other malefactors a simple jail sentence.
A few worlds have ancient pretech artifacts or
technologies that are capable of defeating or suppressing psychic powers. Such resources are always extremely rare, and normally only deployed to protect heads of
state and similar top-level figures, along with government sites of planetary importance.

32• BIOPSIONICS

BIOPSIONICS
Biopsionic powers repair, augment, debilitate, or damage living creatures. Unless otherwise specified the
biopsionicist must be able to touch a target, though
clothing and armor do not interfere with the use of
these abilities. Touching a willing or unsuspecting target is automatic, whereas touching a resisting target
requires a normal Punch hit roll with a bonus equal to
the practitioner’s Biopsionics skill. Such touch effects
do not inflict the normal damage of a Punch attack.
Unsurprisingly, biopsionic powers are among the
most accepted psychic abilities. Even a modestly-experienced biopsion can perform miracles of healing for a
community lucky enough to have their services.

System Strain

Many curative biopsionic powers add to the target’s
System Strain. System Strain is a measure of the amount
of system stress, intrusive modification, and general biological distress an organism might be suffering. Psionic healing, cybernetic implants, and powerful drugs all
add to a target’s System Strain.
If using a power or drug on a target would make
their System Strain exceed their Constitution score, the
effect fails to function; their body simply cannot adapt
to the changes and cannot benefit from them.
System Strain decreases automatically by one point
after each night of rest, provided the organism is wellfed and not compromised by sickness or privation.

Core Technique- Psychic Succor

The adept’s touch stabilizes critically-wounded organisms. More sophisticated practitioners can heal tissue
injuries, though curing diseases, detoxifying poisons,
and fixing congenital deformities require additional
techniques. Each use of Psychic Succor adds one point
of System Strain to the target, or two points if they
were mortally wounded at the time.
Activating Psychic Succor requires the biopsion to
Commit Effort for the day. Once used, they can continue to use it for the rest of that scene without Committing Effort again.
Level-0: The psychic’s touch can automatically stabilize
a mortally-wounded target as a Main Action. This
power must be used on a target within six rounds
of their collapse, and does not function on targets that have been decapitated or killed by Heavy
weapons. It’s the GM’s decision as to whether a
target is intact enough for this power to work.
Level-1: As level-0, and heal 1d6+1 hit points of damage.
If used on a mortally-wounded target, they revive
with the rolled hit points and can act normally on
the next round.
Level-2: As level-1, but healing 2d6+2 hit points instead.
Level-3: As level-2, but healing 2d6+6 hit points instead.
Level-4: As level-3, but healing 3d6+8 hit points instead.

Mastered Succor

Level-1

The biopsion has developed a sophisticated mastery of
their core ability, and they no longer need to Commit
Effort to activate it, and may use it whenever they wish.
The use of additional techniques that augment Psychic
Succor might still require Effort to be Committed.
Organic Purification Protocols
Level-1
The biopsion’s Psychic Succor now cures any poisons or
diseases the subject may be suffering, albeit it requires
Committing Effort for the day as an additional surcharge. Biowarfare organisms, exceptionally virulent
diseases, or TL5 toxins may resist this curing, requiring
a Wis/Biopsionics skill check at a difficulty of at least
10. Failure means that the adept cannot cure the target’s
disease. This technique cannot cure congenital illnesses.
Remote Repair
Level-1
Psychic Succor and other biopsionic techniques that normally require touch contact can now be applied at a
distance up to 100 meters, provided the biopsion can
see the target with their unaided vision. Hostile powers
that normally require a hit roll will hit automatically.
Each time this technique is used, Effort must be Committed for the scene.
Invincible Stand
Level-2
The biopsion has mastered techniques of emergency
tissue reinforcement and system stabilization. As an
Instant action, they can Commit Effort for the scene to
keep themself or a target they can touch active even at
zero hit points. This technique must be used once every
round on the target or they collapse at the end of the
round. If the target suffers hit point damage, the biopsion must Instantly Commit Effort for the scene or the
target goes down immediately with a mortal wound. A
Heavy weapon hit on a subject of this power or similar
physical dismemberment will always kill a target, regardless of this technique.
Major Organ Restoration
Level-2
The biopsion’s Psychic Succor can now cure congenital birth defects and regrow missing limbs and organs.
It can even be used to stabilize targets that have been
dropped by Heavy weapons, decapitated, or otherwise
dramatically dismembered, provided it’s used within
one round per level of Biopsionic skill. The best that
can be done for such badly-mangled targets is stabilization, after which they must rest for 24 hours before any
further hit points can be healed by Biopsionics, stims,
or natural rest.

BIOPSIONICS •33
Tissue Integrity Field

Level-2

The biopsion’s Psychic Succor may now also affect all
allies within ten meters of the target. Allies can decline
the healing if they don’t require it or don’t want to take
the additional System Strain. Each use of this technique
requires that the biopsion Commit Effort for the day in
addition to the cost of the Psychic Succor.
Accelerated Succor
Level-3
The biopsion’s Psychic Succor now can be used as an On
Turn power, albeit only once per round. By Committing an additional Effort for the day with each use, it
can even be used as an Instant power, though it still
can only be used once per round. Any surcharges for
augmenting the succor apply normally, such as with
Tissue Integrity Field.
Metamorph
Level-3
The biopsion can now shape their own or another willing target’s physical form as a Main Action, transforming a touched target into any humanoid form within
50% of their own mass. Claws and other body armaments can be fashioned equivalent to Light or Medium
melee weapons and innate armor equivalent to AC 13.
Gills and other environmental-survival alterations are
also viable at the GM’s discretion, but flight is a bridge
too far for this power.
A person can be impersonated down to the DNA
level, provided a blood or hair sample is available. The
use of this adds one System Strain point to the target
that does not recover so long as the change is in effect.
Applying Metamorph requires that the biopsion Commit
Effort for as long as the change is to be maintained. If
applied to a target other than the psychic, the power
automatically ends if the psychic gets more than one
hundred kilometers away.
Teratic Overload
Level-3
This use of biopsionics inflicts potentially-lethal damage on a touched target as a Main Action, and requires
that the biopsion Commit Effort for the scene. The
target suffers 1d6 damage per level of the psychic’s Biopsionics skill and must make a Physical saving throw.
On a failure, the damage is tripled and the target is now
affected by an obvious, lethal cancer that will kill them
in 1d6 months. The cancer can be treated by a TL4
hospital or ship’s sick bay if managed within a month’s
time. If the biopsion Commits Effort for the day instead
of the scene, they can control the power sufficiently to
do no hit point damage and create very subtle tumors,
leaving the cancer undetectable without a TL4 medical
examination. Such victims probably won’t even know
they’ve been attacked by this power. Whether a success
or failure, this power cannot be used on the same target
more than once per scene.

Holistic Optimization Patterning

Level-4

The biopsion gains the ability to drastically augment
their own or a touched ally’s physical abilities as an
On Turn action. This boost lasts for the rest of the
scene, adds two points of System Strain to the target
and gives them a +2 bonus to all Strength or Dexterity
skill checks, hit rolls, and damage rolls along with 20
extra hit points. Any damage is taken off these temporary hit points first, and both the bonuses and any
hit points in excess of the target’s maximum are lost at
the end of the scene. Each invocation of this technique
requires the biopsion to Commit Effort for the day, and
this power cannot be used on a given target more than
once per scene.
Quintessential Reconstruction
Level-4
The biopsion becomes extremely difficult to kill, encoding their mind in a coherent pattern of MES energy
coterminous with their realspace coordinates. If killed,
the psychic will regenerate from the largest remaining fragment of their body over 24 hours. This process maximizes their System Strain for one week. If
brought to zero hit points during this week, they die
instantly and permanently. The psychic retains a vague
awareness of their surroundings while “dead” and can
postpone their regeneration for up to a week in order
to avoid notice, but burial or entombment may result in
a very short second life. Each use of this power inflicts
one point of permanent attribute loss in an attribute
of the biopsion’s choice.

Biopsionics and Hospitals
Biopsionics is a spectacularly effective discipline
for curing physical injuries and sicknesses, but
its use for the latter is capped by the biopsion’s
available Effort. Hospitals on worlds with access to
psychic academies often have several biopsions on
staff, proficient with the requisite techniques and
capable of quickly healing tremendous amounts of
trauma injuries on short notice.
Assuming one proficient and available biopsion for every 100,000 citizens, however, the total
amount of sickness-curing ability is going to be
very limited, and likely reserved for the powerful
and wealthy. The vanishingly few psychics who
are master metapsions capable of the Flawless
Mastery of Organic Purification Protocols can easily
command as much as two thousand credits a day
just for temporary work at a grateful hospital.
Ordinary PC biopsions who want to pick up
some extra work curing sicknesses can usually find
temp employment with a local medical facility for
50 credits per day per Effort point they have. Note
that some patients may be very upset if the hospital
fails to assign them the PC’s limited Effort.

34• METAPSIONICS

METAPSIONICS
Metapsionics is the rarest and most esoteric of the psychic disciplines, with few psychics having the necessary
temperament or interest in developing these complex
abilities. A metapsion controls psychic energy itself,
molding and shaping the flows of energy that spill
through the brains of those marked by MES.
Taken in isolation, metapsionics allows a psychic
to increase the raw Effort available to them and become
more flexible in how this Effort is used. Expert metapsions can even teach other potential psychics how to
control and channel their new abilities, and the services
of a trained psychic mentor command considerable
sums in most systems.
Beyond this, in most stellar sectors a competent
metapsion is the only practical way to protect a target
from undetectable psychic assault. Without a vigilant
brainguard, a head of state, interstellar celebrity, or
planetary oligarch might find their minds rifled effortlessly by some undetected psychic intruder.
As a consequence, many metapsions become much
more physically competent and better-trained in combat than the average psychic. The high prices they can
command as brainguards attract some, though others
find their clients too aggravating to endure for long.

Core Technique- Psychic Refinement

The metapsion gains improved mastery over their own
powers and an innate sensitivity to the use of psionic
abilities in their presence.
Level-0: The adept can visually and audibly detect the
use of psychic powers. If both the source and target are visible to the metapsion, they can tell who’s
using the power, even if it’s normally imperceptible. They gain a +2 bonus on any saving throw
versus a psionic power.
Level-1: The metapsion’s maximum Effort increases by
an additional point.
Level-2: The adept can determine whether or not a
person is a psychic or has latent psionic abilities
through one round of visual inspection. Their saving throw bonus against psionic powers increases
to +3.
Level-3: The metapsion’s maximum Effort increases by
an additional point.
Level-4: The metapsion can perform a slightly safer
version of torching. Instead of rolling the torching damage die, they simply suffer 10 hit points of
damage after torching is used. The damage occurs
after the fueled power activates, allowing a psychic
at low hit points to trigger a power before falling
unconscious. This damage cannot be healed by
anything but natural bed rest, though a psychic
can be stabilized if this technique drops her to zero
hit points.

Cloak Powers
Level-1
The metapsion can conceal their own psychic abilities
from metapsionic senses. They must Commit Effort
for as long as they wish to cloak their powers. While
hidden, only a metapsion with equal or higher skill in
Metapsionics can detect their abilities with their level-0
or level-2 Psychic Refinement abilities. In such cases, an
opposed Wis/Metapsionics roll is made between the
metapsion and the investigator. If the investigator wins,
the cloak is pierced, while if the metapsion wins, the
investigator’s Psychic Refinement remains oblivious.
Mindtracing
Level-1
The metapsion can trace back the use of psionic powers
they’ve noticed in their presence. By Committing Effort for the scene as an Instant action, they can see and
hear through the senses of a user of a psychic power,
gaining an intuitive awareness of their location and
treating them as a visible target for purposes of their
own abilities. Thus, if they see someone being affected
by a telepathy power with no visible source, they can
use this ability to briefly share the hidden telepath’s
senses. If used on a target that is teleporting, they can
perceive the teleporter’s view of their destination. Use
on a metamorphically-shaped impostor would reveal
the biopsion responsible for the change, and so forth.
These shared senses last for only one round and do not
interfere with the adept’s other actions.
Synthetic Adaptation
Level-1
This is a particularly esoteric technique, one that requires the adept to have at least Program-0 or Fix-0
skill in order to master. With it, however, the metapsion has learned how to synergize with the quantum
intelligence of a VI or True AI in order to apply Telepathy or Biopsion powers to their inanimate corpus. Only
intelligent machines can be affected, as the technique
requires a sentient mind to catalyze the effect.
This synergy takes much of its force from the adept. Any System Strain the powers might inflict must
be paid by the adept rather than the target.
Neural Trap
Level-2
The metapsion allows a hostile psychic into their mental sanctum in order to gain a later advantage. When
targeted by a hostile psionic power that allows a save,
the metapsion may Commit Effort as an Instant action
and voluntarily fail the saving throw, accepting the effect. The next psychic power the user targets at that
assailant then allows the victim no saving throw. This
technique lasts until the metapsion makes their psychic
attack or reclaims their Committed Effort. A hostile
psychic may be affected by only one Neural Trap from
a given psychic at a time.

METAPSIONICS •35

Psychic Static

Level-2

As an Instant action, the metapsion may Commit Effort for the day to negate a perceived psychic power.
The psychic responsible for the effect must Commit
Effort for the day as an Instant action to resist this negation, otherwise the power ends and any action used
to trigger it is wasted. The PC may then Commit Effort for the day again, with each spending and counter-spending until one runs out of Effort or chooses to
stop. Psychic Static can be applied only once per round
to any particular power. The target of the Psychic Static automatically knows the position of the interfering
metapsion, though other onlookers do not have any
obvious way of identifying the metapsion.
Suspended Manifestation
Level-2
The metapsion is capable of “hanging” a psychic power
in their brain, forming the energy patterns and then
suspending them in a self-sustaining loop until it’s time
to trigger their release. The psychic must Commit Effort for the day to hang a power, along with the Effort
normally necessary to trigger it. None of this Effort can
be recovered until the power is expended, after which
it recovers at its usual speed. Activating the power is
an Instant action, or an On Turn action if it allows the
target a saving throw of some kind. Only one ability
can be held suspended at any one time.

Psychic Tutelage

Level-3

An expert metapsion can modulate and temper the
metadimensional energy that surges through an untrained psychic’s mind. This “safety buffer” allows the
novice to experiment with their abilities and gradually
develop the control they need to channel their powers
without causing permanent brain damage. Without
this technique, it is virtually impossible to turn a normal with untapped potential into a trained psychic.
An adept with Metapsionics-3 skill can train up to
ten pupils at once. One with Metapsionics-4 can train
up to one hundred. It requires only a week to train a
potential in ways to avoid accidentally triggering their
powers and suffering the damage that follows, but actually teaching them to use their powers effectively takes
anywhere from one to four years depending on their
natural aptitude and the availability of other psychics
willing to assist the metapsion in the training process.
Surge Momentum
Level-3
The metapsion’s abilities can be reinforced with a degree of metadimensional energy that would cause substantial damage to a less adept mind. Particularly weak
or unprepared minds might be completely crushed by
the force of the adept’s augmented will.
The adept must Commit Effort for the day when
using a power that normally grants its target a saving
throw. The target then suffers a penalty equal to the
adept’s Metapsionics skill on any saving throw normally granted by the power. If the target’s hit die total or
character level is less than half the adept’s level, rounded up, they automatically fail their saving throw.

Concert of Minds
Level-3
As an On Turn action, the metapsion may Commit
Effort and form a psychic gestalt with one or more
willing psychics within three meters, including up to
one other psychic per Metapsion skill level. This gestalt persists as long as the Effort remains committed,
regardless of the subsequent distance between psychics.
On their own turn, any member of the gestalt may use
any power or technique known by any other member,
using the other member’s skill levels as necessary and
paying any Effort cost from their own pool. This gestalt
shares only psychic power, not thoughts or senses. At
the end of each round in which one or more members
have used some other member’s powers or abilities on
their turn of action, the metapsion must Commit Effort
for the scene or the gestalt drops and cannot be re-established for the rest of the scene.

Flawless Mastery
Level-4
When this technique is learned, the adept may choose
one technique from any discipline they know. That
technique no longer requires Effort to be Committed in
any way, though other techniques that augment it may
still exact a cost. Mastered Psychic Static, for example,
can expend an effectively unlimited amount of effort.
If the technique has a duration based on Committed
Effort then it lasts until the metapsion chooses to end it
or is killed. This technique may only be mastered once,
though the perfected technique may be changed with
a month of meditation and practice.

Metadimensional Friction
Level-3
As a Main Action, the metapsion Commits Effort for
the scene to create localized MES turbulence around a
visible target psychic within 200 meters. Each time the
target Commits Effort or an NPC initiates a psychic
power, they suffer 1d8 damage per Metapsionics skill
level of the adept. Each time the target suffers the damage they can attempt a Mental saving throw to throw
off the effect. It lasts no longer than the rest of the scene
at most. Only one application of this friction can affect
a target at once.

Impervious Pavis of Will
Level-4
When this technique is learned, the metapsion must
choose a discipline. They then become entirely immune to unwanted powers from that discipline; they
and their abilities are simply not valid targets for purposes of that discipline’s powers unless the adept chooses to be affected. By Committing Effort for the day as
an Instant action, they can extend this immunity for a
scene to all allies within 50 meters. This technique may
be learned more than once, and any shared protection
applies to all disciplines negated by the adept.

36• PRECOGNITION

PRECOGNITION
The discipline of Precognition relates to sensing the
cascade of future events and reading the achronal chaos of the metadimensional energy that ripples in the
psychic’s brain. Readings provided by Precognition
tend to be focused on the psychic and what they find
interesting or important. Matters irrelevant to the seer
are unlikely to be noticed, even if they are of critical
importance to those involved. More advanced techniques of Precognition can even influence the future,
adjusting probabilities by changing or pruning certain
metadimensional currents.
The future is not carved in stone. Oracles can be
falsified by present action or sheer random chance.
When a reading is ambiguous or the future seems uncertain, the GM should simply give the most probable
reading for the power as their own judgment recommends.
Precognition is strictly future-oriented. For assorted complex reasons, the past is vastly more difficult
to observe with psionic powers, and postcognition is
generally considered impossible.
Precogs are generally viewed with considerable
unease by the general population. They’re not as widely
feared as telepaths, but the uncanny powers of foresight
they possess can make them difficult company. They
can earn very substantial sums of money from those
desperate to learn of some future outcome, but the
specificity of their visions makes it difficult for them
to perceive large-scale future events.
A precog can see a city in flames or a stock market
board showing a crash, but even the most powerful
can’t tell if the conflagration is just a limited local disaster or a planet-consuming catastrophe, nor can they tell
if the crash is a temporary pullback in the market or a
harbinger of global depression. Many precogs have difficulty dealing with this ambiguity, and some become
fixed on personal interpretations of their visions that
may or may not play out as they have seen.

Bending the Future

Everything a precog sees is provisional. Some outcomes
may be so likely as to be nigh-certain, but nothing is
truly, absolutely destined. Vigorous activity or simple
unexpected chance can skew future outcomes.
This effect is one reason why choirs of precogs
have not been more widely exploited by planetary
governments. The clearer and more detailed a future
outcome becomes, the simpler it is to find the crucial
events that can be changed to derail it. The more intense the precognitive focus toward a future event,
the more fluid it becomes as fresh readings take into
account the countermoves that others have made. Rumors persist of ancient pretech augmentation hardware
that can “fix” future outcomes, but most governments
lack the resources to even consider such extravagance.

Core Technique- Oracle

The precog gains a progressively-greater intuitive understanding of their own future. Each invocation of
the Oracle technique requires a Main Action and that
the user Commit Effort for the day. Once triggered,
the adept gets a single brief vision related to the question about the future that they’re asking. This vision
is always from their own personal vantage point and
never reveals more than a minute of insight, though
the psychic processes it almost instantly as part of the
power’s use.
The GM should answer the question as if the
PC were about to perform the act or engage in the
investigation pertinent to the question. Thus, if the
adept wanted to know what pressing a button would
do and the GM knows that it’s connected to a bomb,
the psychic might get a vision of sudden death. If the
bomb were on a time delay that extended past the time
horizon of the oracle, however, the psychic might just
see a vision of herself waiting patiently, with nothing
happening.
Visions should relate to actions and events, not
abstract facts. Oracle couldn’t tell a psychic who the
crime boss of a slum neighborhood is, for example, but
it could give a vision of the psychic caught in the next
bloody riot and the gang boss who’s directing the myriad thugs. It couldn’t reveal the name of a security guard,
but it could show the seer the impending moment that
the next guard patrol will enter the area the psychic
plans to infiltrate. Only the most important or significant information is conveyed by the technique, even if
multiple events of interest might transpire during the
time horizon.
Oracle can only be used on a given question or topic
once until the situation changes substantially or a week
goes by. The maximum time horizon of the Oracle increases as the adept’s Precognition skill improves.
Level-0: One minute into the future.
Level-1: One day into the future.
Level-2: One week into the future.
Level-3: Three months into the future.
Level-4: One year into the future.
Intuitive Response

Level-1

As an Instant action, the precog can Commit Effort for
the scene just before they roll initiative. Their initiative score is treated as one better than anyone else’s
involved in the scene. If another participant has this
power or some other ability that grants automatic initiative success, roll initiative normally to determine
which of them goes first, and then the rest of the combatants act. This ability cannot be used if the precog
has been surprised.

PRECOGNITION •37

Sense the Need

Level-1

Cursed Luck

Level-3

At some point in the recent past, the psychic had a
vague but intense premonition that a particular object
would be needed. By triggering this power as an Instant
action and Committing Effort for the day, the psychic
can retroactively declare that they brought along any
one object that they could have reasonably acquired
and carried to this point. This object must be plausible
given recent events; if the psychic has just been stripsearched, very few objects could reasonably have been
kept, while a psychic who’s just passed through a weapons check couldn’t still have a loaded laser pistol.

Negative probabilities are woven tightly around a visible animate target, including robots and animals but
not including vehicles. Triggering this technique requires a Main Action and Committing Effort for the
scene. The target must roll any attack rolls, damage
rolls, skill checks, and saving throws twice and take the
worst result each time. Any attempts to hit the target
or damage dice rolled against it may be rolled twice and
the better result taken. Intelligent targets can make a
Mental saving throw at the end of each round to throw
off the effect; this save is not penalized by the power.

Terminal Reflection
Level-1
The psychic’s Oracle power automatically triggers as an
Instant action moments before some unexpected danger or ambush, giving the precog a brief vision of the
impending hazard. This warning comes just in time to
avoid springing a trap or to negate combat surprise for
the precog and their companions. If the psychic does
not immediately Commit Effort for the day, this sense
goes numb and this technique cannot be used for the
rest of the day.

Forced Outcome
Level-3
Through careful manipulation of probability, the adept
can influence random physical events in their vicinity.
Triggering this technique requires a Main Action and
Committing Effort for the scene. Any simple, random
mechanical outcome can be completely controlled for
the scene, such as a roulette wheel or the order of a
deck of shuffled cards. Any other physical event in the
area that seems not-entirely-implausible may be made
to occur by this technique, provided it doesn’t involve
more than a few objects and doesn’t require human
involvement. The GM decides what random events are
and are not adequately possible. Anything more than
one unusual coincidence or chance per scene is likely
impossible to produce.

Alternate Outcome
Level-2
The precog can sense impending failure and attempt
to salvage the action. As an Instant action, the precog
can target a visible ally or their own self and Commit
Effort for the day to allow the target to reroll a failed
hit roll, saving throw, or skill check, taking the better
of the two rolls. This power disrupts delicate lines of
probability, however, and cannot be used on any given
target more than once a day.
Destiny’s Shield
Level-2
The precog observes an incoming injury and tries to
find an alternate future in which the attack misses. As
an Instant action, the precog can Commit Effort for
the day to force an attacker to reroll a successful hit
roll. This technique only works on attacks against the
psychic’s person, not against attacks aimed at a vehicle
they’re occupying or harm that doesn’t involve an attack roll. If the rerolled attack still hits, however, the
damage done is maximized. This technique can be used
only once per incoming attack.
Anguished Vision
Level-3
The adept’s precognition is sophisticated enough to
clearly foresee several seconds into the future. As an
Instant action, the psychic may Commit Effort for the
day and declare that what they have just done or seen
is a vision of the immediate future. Time rolls back
to the start of the initiative count in a combat turn,
or six seconds earlier if out of combat. Nothing that
happened during that round has really come to pass yet.
This ability is tremendously draining, and can be
used only once per day.

Not My Time
Level-4
The precog instinctively wrenches the lines of probability away from futures in which they are about to die.
This technique triggers automatically when the precog is about to die, provided they can Commit Effort
for the day. On triggering, random events somehow
conspire to leave the precog alive, even if outrageous
coincidences and ridiculous luck are required. Provided
the precog doesn’t intentionally thrust herself back into
danger, their life is secured for the next few minutes at
least, though there’s no guarantee the psychic will survive intact in mind or body. This technique can trigger
no more often than once per week.
Prophecy
Level-4
The power of the precog extends to dictating future
events that directly involve them. As a Main Action,
the precognitive PC may make one prediction involving their personal future or future condition within
the next year. Provided they take reasonable measures
to enable this prediction, that no direct resistance is
mounted by an enemy, and that the prediction doesn’t
seem highly improbable to the GM, it will come to pass.
The adept must Commit Effort when this power is used,
and the Effort remains Committed until the prophecy
comes to pass or is abandoned. This ability cannot be
used more than once per month and only one prophecy
may be active at a time.

38• TELEKINESIS

TELEKINESIS
Telekinetic abilities are something of a mixed blessing to those psychics who have them. While they
are among the least feared and distrusted of psychic
powers, they also produce effects that are not nearly
so widely-demanded as biopsionic healing or metapsionic brainguarding. A telekinetic must be canny and
creative to get the most from their abilities.
Telekinetic powers are strong but somewhat imprecise. The force they generate is usually invisible,
though a psychic can allow a visible glow if desired, and
the source of the telekinetic manipulation is not obvious to ordinary senses. Objects being held or worn by
a mobile creature cannot normally be manipulated by
telekinesis, nor can unwilling intelligent targets be directly manipulated. Machines, including non-sentient
robots, can be affected as any other inanimate object,
however. The psychic cannot use this discipline to lift
their own person without special techniques.
Some techniques refer to a “physical attack” or
“physical damage”. This means a straightforward kinetic
impact: bullets, punches, collisions, falls, compressions,
or the like. Energy attacks are not included.

Core Technique- Telekinetic Manipulation
The adept may Commit Effort for the scene as a Main
Action to direct telekinetic force toward an object or
person within unaided visual range or with tactile
contact with the psychic. This force isn’t responsive
enough to be effective as a weapon without further
refinement of technique, and cannot cause damage to
living or mobile targets. If used to crush or harm immobile unliving objects, it does 1d6 damage per skill
level of the psychic per round of focus. Objects move at
20 meters per round when moved telekinetically.
A telekinetic force can be maintained over multiple rounds without expending further actions, such as
holding a metal platform in place under a group of allies, but the psychic cannot again activate this technique
on a second object until they release the first.
Level-0: The psychic can exert force as if with one hand
and their own strength.
Level-1: The psychic can manipulate objects as if with
both hands and can lift up to two hundred kilograms with this ability.
Level-2: The psychic can lift or manipulate up to four
hundred kilograms and smash a human-sized
hole in structures of light wooden construction
or lighter as a Main Action.
Level-3: The psychic can manipulate up to eight hundred kilograms and can affect as many individual
objects at once as they have Telekinesis skill levels.
Level-4: The psychic can manipulate up to a metric ton
and can smash human-sized holes in TL4-constructed exterior walls, light stone walls, or similar
barriers as a Main Action.

Kinetic Transversal
Level-1
The adept may Commit Effort as an On Turn action to
move freely over vertical or overhanging surfaces as if
they were flat ground, crossing any solid surface strong
enough to bear five kilos of weight. They can also move
over liquids at their full movement rate. This movement ability lasts as long as the Effort is committed.
Pressure Field
Level-1
As an Instant action, the adept can manifest a protective
force skin around their person equivalent to a vacc suit,
maintaining pressure and temperature even in hard
vacuum conditions. They can ignore temperatures at
a range of plus or minus 100 degrees Celsius and automatically pressurize thin atmospheres for breathability,
or filter particulates or airborne toxins. By Committing
Effort for the scene, they can shield up to six comrades.
This lasts until the user reclaims the Effort.
Telekinetic Armory
Level-1
The adept may Commit Effort as an On Turn action to
create both weapons and armor out of telekinetic force.
These weapons are treated as tech level 4 and act as a
rifle or any advanced melee weapon. Attack rolls can
use either Dexterity, Wisdom, or Constitution modifiers, and may use the Telekinesis skill as the combat skill.
Armor may be created as part of this power, granting the psychic a base Armor Class equal to 15 plus their
Telekinesis skill level. This armor does not stack with
conventional armor, but Dexterity or shields modify
it as usual. The gear continues to exist as long as the
psychic chooses to leave the Effort committed, and they
may be invisible or visible at the psychic’s discretion.
Impact Sump
Level-2
The adept may Commit Effort for the day as an Instant
action to negate a single instance of physical damage.
This ability is too taxing to be used more than once per
day, but as an Instant action, it can be triggered even
after damage is rolled.
Slip Field
Level-2
As a Main Action, the psychic Commits Effort for the
scene and decreases the friction at a point in sight. Up
to ten meters in diameter is affected, making it difficult
for enemies to move from their current position. All
chosen targets must make an Evasion saving throw or
fall prone, becoming unable to stand up or move more
than a meter per Move action taken. If used against a
ground vehicle, the driver must make a Dex/Pilot skill
check at a difficulty of 8 plus the adept’s Telekinesis
skill or go out of control, driving directly forward for
a round and crashing into any obstacles. Targets who
save are immune to this technique for the scene.

TELEKINESIS •39

Telekinetic Expertise

Level-2

The adept has become familiar enough with the manipulation of telekinetic force that they may now use
Telekinetic Manipulation without Committing Effort.
Thermokinesis
Level-2
Telekinetic power involves kinetic energy, but a sufficiently sophisticated grip on motion can be used to
agitate the molecules of an inanimate object and cause
it to melt or burst into flame. Similar focus can chill or
freeze such substances.
Applying Thermokinesis to a target requires that
the adept Commit Effort for the scene as a Main Action.
Thermokinesis cannot affect objects larger than the adept
could lift with their Telekinetic Manipulation.
As with other telekinetic powers, this ability does
not work on objects being held or used by intelligent
creatures. Non-sentient robots or other objects with hit
points take 1d12 damage per level of Telekinesis skill
each time this technique is applied to them.
Tangible Force Construct
Level-3
Once per turn, as an On Turn action, the psychic can
Commit Effort for the scene to create a telekinetic force
construct at a visible point, provided it can fit within
a three-meter cube. The force construct can be shaped
in any way the psychic wishes, and can remain fixed in
its location without external supports if desired. It is
as sturdy as a TL4 construction and may be visible or
invisible at the adept’s choice. The construct lasts until
the end of the scene, until the psychic dispels it, or until
it is smashed with 20 points of damage against AC 15.
Telekinetic Ram
Level-3
As a Main Action, the psychic can Commit Effort for
the scene to target a tremendous, uncontrolled burst of
force at a single target within sight. This burst requires
some time to detonate, however, and will only go off
at the end of the next round. Targets of this technique
are aware of an oppressive, electrical tingling in the air
and are apt to instinctively move; this technique is thus
generally useless against any target that is not entirely
immobile, as any movement of a chosen target disrupts
the ram. Once the ram detonates, however, it is sufficient to destroy any immobile civilian vehicle, create a
five-meter hole in anything short of hardened military
fortifications, or inflict 5d12 damage on anything else
as if it were struck by a Heavy weapon.
Reactive Telekinesis
Level-3
As an Instant action, the psychic can Commit Effort for
the scene whenever an assailant misses them with a
physical attack. The attack is then reflected back against
the assailant, who must reroll the attack against their
own person twice. If either roll hits, the assailant suffers damage from their own attack. If both rolls hit, the
damage is the maximum possible.

Force Puppetry

Level-4

As a Main Action, the telekinetic can Commit Effort for
the day to suborn a visible target’s mobility, whether
robotic, vehicular, or human, provided it’s no larger
than a ground car. A sapient victim can make a Mental saving throw to resist the psychic onslaught; on a
failure, they lose control of their physical actions. If not
piloted by the telekinetic, the target remains motionless
or continues on its current direction of travel. If the
telekinetic spends a Main Action to control them, they
can be made to perform any physical action that is not
directly suicidal, using the psychic’s skill levels and hit
bonus for any attacks or skill checks they might make.
The puppetry lasts until the end of the scene, until the
target leaves the psychic’s sight, or until a sapient target
believes that their action or inaction is about to get
them killed. The psychic’s control is fine enough to
achieve even very delicate physical motions, but it is
not good enough to control the target’s speech, though
it can keep them silent.
Telekinetic Flight
Level-4
As an Instant action, the telekinetic can Commit Effort
to begin flying, and may extend this effect to up to a
half-dozen unresisting, human-sized allies within 30
meters. While flying, the psychic can move at twice
their normal movement rate in any direction They can
plunge earthward at up to terminal velocity without
harm, and even orbital insertions are survivable with
this power if a vacc suit is available or the Pressure Field
technique is used. Allies must end their turns within 30
meters of the psychic to maintain this flight but control
their own motion. As an Instant, this power may be
triggered in time to negate falling damage. The flight
lasts for as long as the Effort remains Committed.

Bot Scrapping
While telekinetic powers can’t normally be used to
harm an intelligent target without a special technique, non-sentient robots have no such protection. A VI or True AI can create enough metadimensional static with their cognition to prevent
harm from telekinesis, but ordinary guard bots,
servitor droids, or warbots are extremely susceptible to telekinetic destruction.
In most cases, this is as simple a matter as
telekinetically lifting and then dropping the bot. A
psychic can destroy as many such bots in a round
as they can telekinetically manipulate; one for
most, or three or four at higher skill levels. This
also assumes the psychic can lift the bot’s weight.
Some military bots may be resilient enough
to handle this battering, suffering 1d10 damage
per level of Telekinesis skill the psychic possesses.
Most have no such chance of survival.

40• TELEPATHY

TELEPATHY
There is no psychic power more threatening and disturbing to normal humanity than that of telepathy.
The prospect of having one’s innermost thoughts and
secrets pried out by imperceptible means is deeply troubling to most men and women, and telepaths are often
given a wide berth by others simply for fear of what
private thoughts they might sift out.
Some worlds that are otherwise accepting of psychic powers go so far as to ban known telepaths and
forbid the teaching of the discipline within their territory. Even those few that do, however, can rarely resist the urge to maintain some “government-approved”
telepathic training program for candidates selected for
their political trustworthiness or powerful backers.
The benefits of having an imperceptible mental spy
are too great for most states to forgo.
Most worlds do not ban telepaths. On these planets, the sheer rarity of psychic powers and the limited
chance that any one individual might be unlawfully
scanned outweigh any fear of unchecked telepathic intrusion. Telepathic testimony is almost never accepted
in a court of law, however, outside of the most psychic-centered societies.
Almost all worlds forbid the uninvited use of telepathic powers on another person. The crime is very difficult to prove, but usually comes with harsh penalties.
Open admission of an illicit scan is generally considered
proof, so PC telepaths are advised to be discreet.
Telepathic shielding devices and substances do
exist in very limited amounts. Even during the height
of the Mandate, such resources were never abundant.
Nowadays, only heads of state and similar elite personages might expect to shelter behind psionics-proof
walls or have devices to alert them to telepathic tampering. Even then, many worlds will simply lack the
pretech artifacts to erect such protection, even for their
most important members.

Using and Detecting Telepathy

Telepathy operates at a very basic level of mental contact, and is not impeded by a lack of shared languages. While the basic forms of telepathy only function
on intelligent creatures, aliens or transhumans with
human-like cognition can be affected. VIs, True AIs,
and other non-biological intelligences are not normally
subject to Telepathy techniques.
Telepathy is a subtle ability, and targets of its technique will not normally be aware of it. Only those with
metapsionic expertise or Telepathy-0 skill or greater
can tell when they’ve been targeted by Telepathy. Others may suspect this influence, particularly if they’re
aware of the existence of psychics and have just done
something utterly inexplicable to their own reasoning.
Certain extremely rare TL5 devices can also alert a target to the presence of telepathic tampering.

Core Technique- Telepathic Contact

The telepath can obtain a progressively-deeper understanding of a sentient target’s thoughts. The target must
be visible or otherwise perceptible to the telepath’s unaided senses. Opening a contact requires the telepath to
Commit Effort for the day as a Main Action, and the
contact lasts for a scene at most unless augmented by
other techniques.
The depth of contact that can be made depends on
the psychic’s Telepathy skill. A single contact can use
any or all of the effects permitted to a telepath of the
user’s skill level. Basic forms of contact do not allow for
a saving throw, though more advanced probes allow
the target to make a Mental saving throw to resist. On
a successful save, no form of this technique that allows
a save can be used on them for the rest of the scene.
Level-0: Observe emotional states in a target. Intense
emotions provide a single word or image related
to the focus of the feelings.
Level-1: A shallow gestalt with the target’s language centers allows the telepath to understand any form of
communication made by the target. If the psychic
has the requisite body parts to speak the target’s
language, they can communicate with it in turn.
Level-2: The psychic’s awareness of the target’s surface
cognition is sophisticated enough to read their
current thoughts, though it can’t pick up memories or non-obvious connections. The target gets
a Mental saving throw to resist this.
Level-3: The psychic can drill down into the target’s
memory to get a one or two-sentence answer to
any single question they ask, or receive a single
answering vision of the target’s recollections. The
target can attempt a Mental saving throw to resist
this power, and whether or not it succeeds the
contact is automatically ended. It can be re-established, but only by activating this technique again.
Level-4: The psychic instantly gets a full and nuanced
awareness of everything the target can remember
about a particular topic. The target can attempt
a Mental saving throw to resist this power, and
whether or not it succeeds the contact is automatically ended afterwards. It can be re-established,
but only by activating this technique again.
Facile Mind
Level-1
The telepath is practiced at opening a Telepathic Contact,
and need only Commit Effort for the scene to do so, instead of Committing Effort for the day. If contacting an
ally who has practiced the process with the psychic for
at least a week, opening the contact normally requires
no Effort at all. In both cases, if the telepath chooses to
Commit Effort for the day, they can open a Telepathic
Contact as an Instant action rather than a Main Action.

TELEPATHY •41

Transmit Thought

Level-1

The telepath can send thoughts and images over a Telepathic Contact, allowing two-way communication with
a willing target as an Instant action when desired.
Far Thought
Level-2
Once a telepath has made a Telepathic Contact with a
target, they can thereafter activate the technique whenever that target is within 100 kilometers, whether or
not the psychic knows where they are. At Telepathy-3
the range increases to 1,000 kilometers, and at Telepathy-4 it extends over an entire planet and up to orbital
distances. This distant connection is tenuous, however,
and the psychic cannot use any technique through it
that would allow the target a saving throw to resist.
Suppress Cognition
Level-2
Through intense focus, the telepath can make the target
of a Telepathic Contact simply not think about something, whether that’s the presence of the telepath, the
possibility of committing violence, the absence of important documentation, or any other single potential
action or one specific person. This technique requires
the psychic to Commit Effort for the scene as a Main
Action. The target gets a Mental saving throw to resist
this power and become immune to it for the scene. If
failed, the thought remains unthinkable for the rest of
the scene unless the target perceives physical danger or
a traumatic threat to something they prize highly. In
that case, the block instantly dissolves and cannot be
re-established during the scene. Once the effect ends,
the target will remain oblivious to their temporary
fugue unless it is brought to their attention somehow.
Reflex Response
Level-3
As a Main Action, the telepath can Commit Effort for
the day to force a sudden, irrational impulse into the
target of a Telepathic Contact. The target may make a
Mental saving throw to resist; on a failure, they will
use their next available action to carry out the impulse
to the best of their ability. This impulse cannot be
self-injurious or harmful to a loved one, but it can be
foolish, reckless, or harmful to others. The target may
not understand why they have done the action, but will
usually attempt to rationalize it as their choice.
Telepathic Assault
Level-3
The telepath Commits Effort for the day as a Main
Action to force a wave of metadimensional energy
through the brain of a Telepathic Contact target. The
assault does 6d6 damage, or 9d6 damage if the telepath
has Telepathy-4 skill. The target may make a Mental
saving throw to halve the damage. This assault cannot
kill a target, but can knock them unconscious for an
hour if they’re reduced to zero hit points, after which
they wake up with one hit point. A victim cannot be
targeted by an assault more than once per scene.

Telepathic Control
Telepathy is not a discipline well-suited to direct
mental control of other beings. While a telepath
can impart urges and thoughts to a target, they
lack the tools to assume direct control of a victim’s
physical actions. The best they can do is implant
ideas in the target’s head and try to hijack the
short-term cognition of the victim.
Persistent legends speak of more direct disciplines practiced during the Mandate’s heyday.
These arts supposedly allowed a psychic to take
direct control of a subject’s physical form, manipulating it with effortless ease to perform whatever
acts the psychic desired. Unlike telepathy, however, these disciplines were unable to touch the
cognitive centers of a target or read their mental
activity. If any such disciplines ever existed, their
possessors are doubtless very discreet with them.

Memory Editing

Level-4

The telepath can make simple edits to the memory of
a target currently linked by a Telepathic Contact. Events
of no more than 24 hours in duration can be erased
from memory, conversations can be created or changed,
new events can be added to a day, or other similar alterations made. The psychic can make these changes
as a Main Action by Committing Effort for the day. If
the psychic doesn’t have a good understanding of the
memories they’re changing, such as might be granted
by the level-4 degree of Telepathic Contact, the edits they
make may not fit well. The target gets a Mental saving
throw to resist editing for the rest of the scene, but on
a failure, they will not notice the changed memories
until given a reason to recollect them.
Unity of Thought
Level-4
The telepath becomes exceptionally skilled at weaving
together multiple allied minds. When they establish a
Telepathic Contact with a willing ally they may bind up to
six willing participants into the same contact without
further Effort. This multi-person link is relatively shallow, and allows only the Instant exchange of thoughts,
images, and sensory impressions. While under its effect, every participant knows the exact location and
condition of all others, and uses the best Initiative roll
of any of them if combat commences. At the table, up
to five minutes of discussion and coordination among
the players can be arranged each round without incurring delays for the PCs. Every combat turn, one gestalt
member of the psychic’s choice gets an extra round of
action to represent the benefits of the perfect coordination of the group. The psychic cannot gain this bonus
round himself. The telepathic link lasts as long as the
psychic initiates no new Telepathic Contact, and it has a
range that extends to any point within a solar system.

42• TELEPORTATION

TELEPORTATION
Teleporters do not provoke the kind of persistent
worry that telepaths induce in most normals, but their
particular gifts cause a more physical concern. An experienced teleporter can reach or see into any location
they’ve ever been; security officials don’t just need to
make sure that no teleporter is in a restricted area, but
that they’ve never been there before at any time. Access
into the most important areas is carefully filtered to
ensure that no outside teleporter ever gets a chance to
see a location they might suddenly appear in several
months or years later.
Most governments with access to trained psychics
will have at least a few expert teleporters on hand to
provide untraceable communications links and superlative infiltrators. Despite their many advantages in intrusion and evasion, however, a teleporter needs the
skills to actually get into a restricted area before they
can take advantage of a quick escape. It’s not unknown
for teleporters to be paired with more conventional
burglars who supply the security-defeating skills and
information-gathering talents that a professional psychic doesn’t always have the time to cultivate.
The criminal applications of teleportation are obvious, as is its utility in surveillance. Some bold teleporters make excellent money as thieves or spies for
whatever employer can afford their exorbitant fees.
The price for their services is invariably high, not only
due to the rarity of experienced teleporters, but due to
the consequences of arrest.
As tempting as the criminal path can be for many
teleporters, most are dissuaded by the penalties. Very
few worlds have prison facilities that are in any way designed to cope with teleporting inmates. On advanced
worlds, this means that criminal teleporters are often
implanted with surgical bombs keyed to explode if they
leave a restricted area or stop receiving a specific signal
from a government transmitter. On primitive worlds,
this means that criminal teleporters face summary execution for any crime more serious than a misdemeanor.
Some devices can be used to defeat teleporters,
creating a curdled patch of metadimensional space
that is impossible to enter or leave via teleportation.
These ancient pretech artifacts are invariably ridiculously expensive in the unlikely case that a planetary
government allows them to remain in private hands at
all, and only the most important figures of an advanced
world will have any access to teleporter-sealed “safe
zones”. Many worlds have no access to such devices at
all, with even princes and potentates left to keep a wary
eye on teleporting psychics. A metapsion brainguard is
the usual low-tech answer to psychic threats, if such an
expensive mercenary can be hired on the world.

Core Technique- Personal Apportation

The teleporter can translocate to another location they
have either occupied before or can see with their unaided vision. Locations are fixed in reference to the nearest
major gravity well. For example, it is not possible to
teleport to the cockpit of a distant moving vehicle they
once occupied, but they can teleport to another point
on a planet’s surface even though the planet has since
moved far through the stellar void.
The core technique allows the teleporter to move
himself and any mass he is able to carry with his own
natural strength. Resisting targets cannot be carried
along, and unresisting ones must be touched. A teleporter can leave any clothing, shackles, adhesions, or
other matter behind when he teleports, but he cannot
leave behind matter that has been inserted into his
body, such as cybernetics or shrapnel. Matter cannot
be partially left behind.
A teleporter will instinctively abort any apportation that would leave him embedded in a solid object
or in an environment of imminent physical harm. Any
Committed Effort on such aborted jumps is wasted, as
is any action spent triggering the power.
The maximum range of Personal Apportation depends on the teleporter’s skill level. Teleporting with
Personal Apportation counts as a Main Action and requires that the psychic Commit Effort for the scene.
Level-0: The psychic can teleport up to 10 meters.
Level-1: The psychic can teleport up to 100 meters.
Level-2: The psychic can teleport up to 10 kilometers.
Level-3: The psychic can teleport up to 1,000 kilometers.
Level-4: The psychic can teleport anywhere on a planet’s surface or near orbit.
Proficient Apportation

Level-1

Personal Apportation now counts as a Move action,
though it still can be performed only once per round.
Apportations of 10 meters or less no longer require
Effort to be Committed, though any augments to the
technique must still be paid for normally.
Spatial Awareness

Level-1

The psychic may Commit Effort as an On Turn action to gain an intuitive 360-degree awareness of their
physical surroundings. The sense is roughly equivalent
to sight out to 100 meters, though it cannot read text
or distinguish colors. It is blocked by solid objects but
is unimpeded by darkness, mist, blinding light, holograms, or optical illusions. The sense lasts as long as the
Effort remains Committed to the technique.

TELEPORTATION •43

Burdened Apportation

Level-2

The psychic can carry willing companions with them
when using Personal Apportation. Up to three human-sized companions and their man-portable gear
may be carried per skill level in Teleportation. Allies
must be within 3 meters of the teleporter to be carried
along. Ordinary inert matter cannot be carried along
unless the psychic is touching it or it’s being carried by
an ally affected by this power. If carrying inert mass, up
to two hundred kilos of objects can be carried per skill
level. Using this technique increases the Effort cost of
Personal Apportation, requiring that an extra point of
Effort be Committed for the day.
Perceptive Dislocation

Level-2

Commit Effort for the day to sense any location the
psychic could teleport to. The psychic perceives the
location as if there, lasting for fifteen minutes at most.
Spatial Synchrony Mandala

Level-3

Expert teleporters can be infuriatingly difficult to pin
down. By Committing an additional Effort for the day
as an Instant action, the adept can use Personal Apportation as an On Turn action, even if they’ve already used it
once this round. Apporting itself costs whatever Effort
it normally would, in addition to any techniques that
augment it. Rift Reduplication can only be triggered once
per round.
If the adept uses their powers to teleport into a
location, perform an action, and then use Rift Reduplication to teleport back out, onlookers in the area will
not have time to react to their action or attack the adept
unless the onlookers have held their action explicitly
to counter the psychic. Enemies who hold their action
this way waste it entirely if the psychic does not give
them a chance to attack or otherwise interfere. Such a
lightning strike may be surprising to onlookers, but it
doesn’t allow enough preparation time to count as an
Execution Attack as described on page 52.

Level-2

The psychic imprints a particular object or person on
their psionic awareness. Provided the object is relatively intact and in range of their Personal Apportation, the
psychic always knows its exact location and can teleport
to within three meters of it with Personal Apportation
even if it has moved from its original location. Imprinting an object requires an hour’s meditation with
it, and only one object can be imprinted at a time. If
imprinting on a person, the target must be willing and
cooperative to make the imprint. Objects must be at
least one kilogram in mass to be effectively tracked.
Effortless Apportation
Level-3
The psychic does not need to Commit Effort to use
Personal Apportation. If the technique is augmented by
other techniques that come with their own extra or increased cost, however, this extra cost must still be paid.
Stutterjump

Rift Reduplication

Level-3

The psychic can instinctively micro-teleport away from
incoming danger. As an On Turn action they may
Commit Effort to begin shifting their spatial position
away from attacks, gaining a base Armor Class of 20
so long as the Effort remains Committed. This Armor
Class is not modified by armor, shields, or Dexterity
modifiers, and the micro-jumps do not significantly
move the psychic from their current location. While
Stutterjump is active, as an Instant action the adept may
Commit Effort for the day to negate a successful hit by
a weapon attack, even after damage has been rolled.
This reflexive defensive jump may be used only once
per day and leaves the psychic just outside the radius
of explosions or other area-effect attacks.

Deep Intrusion

Level-4

The adept can use Personal Apportation to blind-teleport
into a building, structure, vehicle, or spaceship visible
to them, including spaceships close enough to engage
in conventional ship-to-ship combat. They intuitively
seek out a space large enough to hold them and without
immediate environmental hazards, but cannot control
their precise destination. Using this technique in conjunction with Personal Apportation is very draining to
the psychic, and requires that they Commit an additional Effort point for the day.
Offensive Apportation

Level-4

The psychic can use Personal Apportation as a Main Action to teleport an unwilling target, provided the user
can make physical contact with them. Contact with an
unsuspecting or incapacitated target is automatic, while
touching a resisting enemy requires a Punch hit roll
with a bonus equal to the psychic’s Teleportation skill.
If the psychic does not use the Burdened Apportation
technique then only the target is teleported; otherwise
the user may go along with them. The psychic cannot
teleport a target to any location they could not teleport to, including locations of imminent environmental danger, such as high in the air, into a windowless
tomb, or into the middle of a sea. A conscious, resisting target can make a Mental saving throw to forcibly
abort the teleportation, rolling at a penalty equal to
the psychic’s Teleportation skill. Use of this technique
adds to the cost of Personal Apportation, requiring the
psychic Commit an additional point of Effort for the
day whether the touch hits or not.

