SECTOR CREATION
Every self-respecting sci-fi game needs to be able to
provide a stock of interesting alien worlds. Even if a
campaign should happen to take place largely on a single world, the backdrop of foreign spheres adds context
and additional adventure hooks to the game.
Most campaigns are going to involve substantial
world-hopping, however, and the GM needs to be
ready to deal with this. This chapter will give you the
tools you need to fashion a sector of the void that will
be worth the reckless daring of a band of heroic PCs.

The Nature of Sectors

In the former days of the Mandate, human space was
generally divided into administrative sectors, each one
the particular responsibility of some fragment of the
ancient Terran bureaucracy. By the end of the Second
Wave, these responsibilities were almost entirely fictitious, as the Mandate Fleet lacked the manpower necessary to exert Old Earth’s will on its scattered progeny.
Even so, the centuries-old grind of bureaucratic procedure still dutifully labeled each fragment of distant
space with its own identity.
Sectors were established on the basis of metadimensional proximity rather than simple spatial propinquity. Individual stars in a sector might be spread
out over dozens of light years, but the metadimensional
currents between them were strong enough to allow
quick travel among them, when a physically-neighboring star might require impossibly lengthy drills through
metadimensional space to reach it.
Settlers in these far sectors often adopted Mandate
sector nomenclature simply out of convenience. The
sectors that Fleet scout ships and far trader adventurers
mapped out were composed of stars “close” enough to
allow for trade with their ramshackle spike drives and
colonial cargo haulers, and their density allowed for
trade and assistance between nearby friendly worlds.
Those with a more isolationist bent sought out sectors
with far-scattered stars that couldn’t be bridged by the
less sophisticated drives that most colonists used.
Most sectors had limited contact with other regions of space. While “bordering” stars could sometimes allow drills into a neighboring sector, large
patches of unfriendly metadimensional space often
strictly limited the available paths into or out of a sector.
Some sectors were entirely inaccessible by anything but
top-grade Mandate spike drives capable of leaping the
broad gaps around them, and some entire regions were
isolated by a few narrow bridgepoints into the cluster.
As a consequence, modern human space varies
wildly in every respect. Some regions have sophisticated interstellar trade and wide-reaching empires, while
others are struggling to rise from primitive barbarism.
A lost bridgepoint can separate whole empires, leaving
both entirely ignorant of each other… for the moment.

Sectors In Your Game

From a campaign perspective, sectors limit the scope
of material you need to take into account in your game.
While it’s perfectly possible to run a game with multiple interconnected sectors, the sheer bulk of worlds can
make that a painful prospect for most GMs. A single
sector of 21-30 worlds is more than enough for most
parties to explore.
Sectors and interstellar regions also provide you
with a convenient explanation for running dramatically different campaigns. Players who want to run a
space-operatic game set in a region of easy spaceflight
and consistent high-tech marvels can do so, while a
group that wants a harder sci-fi experience in a sector
without psionic powers or exotic energy weapons can
have their play as well. The vast sweep of human space
has room for your preferred tropes without having to
fight the setting. No matter what you want to play,
there’s some chunk of human space that has it.
A sector provides the basic background for the adventures the PCs encounter, as every world needs to
have some kind of adventure-worthy content if it’s to
justify its drain on a GM’s creativity and focus. Creating worlds purely for pleasure or aesthetic satisfaction
is entirely valid, but as a working GM, you also need
material you can play. This chapter will show you how
to maximize the return on your effort, and get the most
playable content out of the least amount of work.
This is a necessity in any system, but it is especially important if you’re going to be running a sandbox
game. A GM who tries to flesh out every nook and
cranny of the dozens of worlds they create will be rapidly exhausted by the effort, and might still lack the
content they need to actually run a game during the
next session of play. A GM needs to have a plan and
an appropriate set of tools if they are to deal with the
challenge in a comfortable, straightforward way.
When building a sector, you can generally assume
that it’s isolated from any neighboring regions. There
might be a few connections along the “borders” of the
sector, still-remembered spike drive paths into the next
collection of worlds, but you’ve got enough to build if
you just focus on a single sector at a time.
You are advised to carefully read the following
pages and take heed of the advice on how much content you should create for each world. A GM would
not be a GM if they did not take pleasure in creating
wondrous new worlds to explore, but the most enthusiastic demiurge still has a limited amount of creative
energy, time, and focus to spend on a campaign. If you
follow the steps in the following pages, you’ll be able to
ensure a playable amount of gaming content for your
next session before you start spending your effort on
more decorative elements of your creation.

130• SECTOR CREATION

CREATING A STELLAR SECTOR
Once you’ve decided to forge your own piece of the
infinite void, you’ll want to grab a sheet of large-hex
hex paper from one of the many templates available online. First you’ll make a stellar map of the sector on this
sheet, and then you’ll individually flesh out the worlds
to whatever degree of fineness your needs require.
One crucial thing to remember at this stage of
creation is that you do not have to create everything. You
don’t need to answer every question about the sector or
have every world in adventure-ready condition. Right
now you’re just laying down broad strokes and rough
colors to the sector, and when it comes time to do detail
work you’ll save it for the worlds that matter most to
your immediate needs.
Every GM has a limited supply of time, energy,
and creative inspiration. If you try to fabricate an entire complete sector in one go, with interesting planets
and meaningful interstellar intrigue and easy adventure
hooks all over the place, you’re likely to exhaust yourself before you even get to play.
Instead, you should follow a simple guiding principle whenever building anything for your campaign,
whether a stellar sector or an adventure outline.
Am I having fun? If you’re enjoying yourself, then
you can keep building. We follow this hobby because
it’s fun, and if you’re enjoying the process then you
should let yourself have your indulgence.
Am I going to need this for the next session? If what
you’re creating is something you know you’re going to
need for the next game session, then you should finish
it. Don’t let this feeling of obligation extend to every
detail, however; it can be easy to imagine situations
where you’ll need to elaborate some NPC or organization or location, but if you respond to every such possibility you’ll never get away from the drawing board.
If you’re not having fun and you don’t need it for
your next game session, stop it. You’re going to exhaust
yourself on minutiae and trivia and not have the energy
to do the parts you really do need, or the vigor needed
to actually run this for the group.
With that principle kept firmly in mind, it’s time
to start building the sector.

Place the Stars

The standard sector map is a grid of hexagons 8 wide by
10 high, with hex templates easily acquired from the net.
Roll 1d10 and add 20 to determine the total number of
stars in the sector, or simply choose a number that suits.
For the first twenty or so stars, roll 1d8 and 1d10
together to determine the column and row in which
to place the star. If the hex is already occupied, place it
adjacent in the direction of the nearest edge.
Some columns have “half-hexes” in them, and only
9 full hexes; if you roll a 10 for such a column, either
reroll or place it at the bottom-most full hex.

Once you’ve placed the randomly-positioned
stars, add the remainder to connect any stellar clumps
or groupings. Remember that standard postech spike
drives can’t reach more than 3 hexes, so any cluster that
can’t be reached with such a drill will be inaccessible to
anything but pretech-grade drives.
The stellar map you’ve just created is an abstraction, one reflecting the eddies and currents of metadimensional space. The individual stars might look
adjacent on the map, but some may be vast distances
apart. If you’d prefer to use more realistic star maps,
you can grab some three-dimensional star map off the
web and convert a convenient number of light years
into a single “hex” of distance for spike drive purposes.

Lay Down the Primary Worlds

With the stars placed, it’s time to place the primary
inhabited worlds. While it’s possible to declare that
a star is orbited only by barren rocks, such stars are
more difficult to make useful as places of adventure
and gameable fun.
Right now, assume that each inhabited system has
a single primary world. The original colonists would
have naturally sought out the best, most habitable
world for their founding. As a consequence, however
nasty the primary world is, the others in the system
are probably even worse. If you wish to add additional
planets to the system later, you can do so, but for now
you’ll want to focus on just one.
Start by rolling two world tags for each planet.
World tags are simple tropes that reflect the most important qualities about the world, or at least those qualities most important to adventurers. A list of a hundred
potential world tags starts on page 132.
It’s most convenient to roll world tags for each
planet before moving on to the other elements of the
world, so you spend less time flipping back and forth
between the sections. Don’t worry about making the
tags make sense yet. Just note them down and go on.
Next, roll the atmospheres for each world. In this
and the following steps, you can either reroll results
that make no sense in light of the world tags you’ve
generated, or simply pick a result that fits. If you’re
feeling more adventurous, however, you can try to
think of an explanation that reconciles seemingly incommensurate results.
After you roll atmospheres for each planet, repeat
the process for temperature, biosphere, population,
and tech level. Optionally, you can go on to add additional planets or points of interest to each system.
Finally, tack on a name for the planet and give it a
sentence worth of description. You don’t need to flesh
it out fully right now. Just note down whatever rough
idea of it comes to mind from its world tags, population,
and other planetary qualities.

SECTOR CREATION •131

Mark Polities and Trade Routes

Identify the star systems that are in contact with each
other and draw lines of communication between them.
Remember that any gap of 4 or more hexes can’t be
crossed without pretech spike drives, so any contact
between distant clusters will have to be through an
intermediate world.
Worlds in contact with each other may not necessarily be friendly, but they do know about each other
and have at least a basic understanding of local conditions. Some provision is usually made for foreign
visitors from these other worlds, even if it’s nothing
more than a strictly-monitored starport housing unit.
If two or more planets seem like they ought to
belong to the same interstellar polity, sketch out a “border” around the grouping. Most TL4 worlds would be
very hard-pressed to mount an effective interstellar
invasion of a peer world, so these polities have likely
formed out of diplomatic or cultural ties, or consist of
a local hegemon exerting its rule over planets too weak
or primitive to resist their influence.
Many sectors will have no multi-system governments of any kind. The individual worlds might be too
independent, or the recovery of spaceflight technology
may have been too recent to allow for ties of mutual
governance to form yet. Such disjointed sectors can
make life easier for the typical band of PCs, as escape
into a new system means escape from the legal jurisdiction of a world they may have recently offended.

Build Out the Important Worlds

Most of the worlds in your sector don’t need anything
more than what you’ve already given them. A few
worlds need more elaborate detail, however, and for
these you’ll want to make use of a separate planetary
record sheet for the world.
Only detail worlds that you’re going to need for
the next session. In this case, that means you should
detail the world that the campaign starts on and those
worlds that the PCs might end up traveling to at the
end of the first session. For most purposes, this just
means the starting world and its immediate neighbors.
First, pick a rough cultural template for the world.
Maybe it has a Latin American flavor, or was founded
by Russian colonists, or was an outpost of Byzantine
Empire enthusiasts. This culture has doubtless changed
drastically since its initial founding, but it gives you a
baseline for assigning names to people and places, identifying the common language spoken on the planet, and
giving you enough information to describe local foods,
architectural styles, and small slice-of-life elements.
You can always take the time to create an entirely
new hybrid culture, but whatever you make or choose
should be clear enough in your mind to let you give
quick answers to sudden questions about cultural values or local habits. Again, it’s not critical to worry about
historical accuracy; these worlds have had centuries to
form their own worldviews and local customs.

Next, use the world tags to create adventure components. Each tag includes different example Enemies,
Friends, Complications, Things, and Places. Take an
Enemy from both world tags or create one for each, and
merge them together into a single antagonist. Thus, a
Feral World with Heavy Industry might have a cannibal
oligarch who literally lives on the flesh and blood of his
slave laborers. Give this Enemy a name and a sentence
of description.
Repeat the process for a Friend, a Complication,
a Thing, and a Place. You don’t necessarily need to use
both tags in every instance, and you’ll likely want to
make up your own components inspired by the tags,
but you should have at least one item in each category
written down on the planetary record. You’ll use these
raw elements later to create a starting adventure for
your band of star-faring freebooters.
Lastly, take a few minutes to answer some critical
questions about the planet, noting the answers down
in the cultural section of the sheet.
What does this world have that the PCs might care
about? Does it export a valuable and portable commodity, or provide a special tech, or have unique job opportunities for expendable offworlder adventurers?
What is the biggest conflict on the world right
now? Is it a social struggle between classes, tension
with offworlder merchants or visitors, a war going on
among local governments, or some other big crisis?
Every world should have at least one obvious conflict
that the PCs might choose to engage or be pulled into.
What do they think about outsiders? Are they
comfortable with offworlders, do they view them with
unusual mistrust, or are they outright xenophobic?
What is law enforcement like? Are there special
laws that might tangle the PCs? If the PCs break a law,
what kind of enforcement can they expect?
Where do the PCs land? What’s the name of the
major starport on the world, and does the starport have
any special deficiencies or unique opportunities?
You can flesh out a world beyond these questions
if you wish, but they provide a bare minimum of data.

Choose Factions and Relations

Lastly, look at what you’ve created and determine
the relationships between the starting world and its
neighbors. Also, decide on the relationships between
any polities you’ve established. Open interstellar warfare is very hard for a lone TL4 world to sustain, but
a powerful planet or combine might be able to do it.
More likely are cold wars of spies and saboteurs.
You may decide to establish one or more Factions
to help give some independent motion to the sector’s
background. Two or three Factions are plenty for the
start of a campaign, and you should feel free to make
new ones or let old ones fall inactive as the game progresses. Rules for Factions start on page 210.
And with that, your sector is ready for play. The
Adventure Creation chapter gives the next step.

132• WORLD TAGS

ASSIGNING WORLD TAGS
The first step in world creation, and perhaps the most
important, lies in assigning “tags” to the world. Tags
are brief conceptual tropes that set the world off from
planets of otherwise similar population and characteristics. You can either pick from the tag table to select
qualities that sound interesting for a world, or else roll
percentile dice to select them randomly.
In general, you should pick or roll two tags for
any given world. Using a single tag can leave a planet feeling somewhat flat and one-dimensional, while
using three or more can end up muddying the feel of
the world. The goal of the tags is not to automatically combine into some intricately sophisticated world
model, but to provide some clear, bright elements to
relate to the PCs. Tags can randomly give you “desert
planet torn by civil war”, from which you can then create “an arid world riven by factional disputes between
fragmented clans, the families based around ownership
of irreplaceable pre-Scream moisture collectors”.
Tags are meant to simplify your life as a GM. They
provide quick, simple hooks for adventure and cultural
characterization to help distinguish the myriad worlds
of your campaign from each other.
d100

Tag

1

Abandoned Colony

2
3

d100

Tag

Each tag includes associated entries for Enemies,
Friends, Complications, Things, and Places that fit with
that tag. GMs can combine the elements of the two
tags to create ones flavored specifically for that world.
For example, two random tags for a world might be
“Regional Hegemon” and “Psionics Fear”. Combining
the “Colonial Official” and “Mental Purity Investigator” entries from the enemies lists of those tags, we
come up with Heinrich Stalt, Imperial Mind Proctor,
a grim inquisitor dispatched to the worlds under Imperial “protection” to purge them of the awful curse of
psionically-active monsters.
These NPCs, objects, places, and situations can
be used as raw grist for generating your adventures or
be slotted into the scenario seeds provided later in the
Adventure Generation chapter. Of course, not every
Enemy will be intrinsically hostile to the PCs, nor every
Friend necessarily a sympathetic figure.
Naturally, you should feel free to come up with
your own tags as well. Almost any science-fiction trope
that you enjoy can be turned into a tag, and characteristic elements can be blended into the list of raw
adventure components.
d100

Tag

Tag

Flying Cities

Alien Ruins

27

Forbidden Tech

52

Night World

77

Rising Hegemon

Altered Humanity

28

Former Warriors

53

Nomads

78

Ritual Combat

51

Misandry/Misogyny

d100

26

76

Rigid Culture

4

Anarchists

29

Freak Geology

54

Oceanic World

79

Robots

5

Anthropomorphs

30

Freak Weather

55

Out of Contact

80

Seagoing Cities

6

Area 51

31

Friendly Foe

56

Outpost World

81

Sealed Menace

7

Badlands World

32

Gold Rush

57

Perimeter Agency

82

Secret Masters

8

Battleground

33

Great Work

58

Pilgrimage Site

83

Sectarians

9

Beastmasters

34

Hatred

59

Pleasure World

84

Seismic Instability

10

Bubble Cities

35

Heavy Industry

60

Police State

85

Shackled World

11

Cheap Life

36

Heavy Mining

61

Post-Scarcity

86

Societal Despair

12

Civil War

37

Hivemind

62

Preceptor Archive

87

Sole Supplier

13

Cold War

38

Holy War

63

Pretech Cultists

88

Taboo Treasure

14

Colonized Population

39

Hostile Biosphere

64

Primitive Aliens

89

Terraform Failure

15

Cultural Power

40

Hostile Space

65

Prison Planet

90

Theocracy

16

Cybercommunists

41

Immortals

66

Psionics Academy

91

Tomb World

17

Cyborgs

42

Local Specialty

67

Psionics Fear

92

Trade Hub

18

Cyclical Doom

43

Local Tech

68

Psionics Worship

93

Tyranny

19

Desert World

44

Major Spaceyard

69

Quarantined World

94

Unbraked AI

20

Doomed World

45

Mandarinate

70

Radioactive World

95

Urbanized Surface

21

Dying Race

46

Mandate Base

71

Refugees

96

Utopia

22

Eugenic Cult

47

Maneaters

72

Regional Hegemon

97

Warlords

23

Exchange Consulate

48

Megacorps

73

Restrictive Laws

98

Xenophiles

24

Fallen Hegemon

49

Mercenaries

74

Revanchists

99

Xenophobes

25

Feral World

50

Minimal Contact

75

Revolutionaries

00

Zombies

WORLD TAGS •133
Abandoned Colony

Alien Ruins

The world once hosted a colony, whether human or
otherwise, until some crisis or natural disaster drove
the inhabitants away or killed them off. The colony
might have been mercantile in nature, an expedition
to extract valuable local resources, or it might have
been a reclusive cabal of zealots. The remains of the
colony are usually in ruins, and might still be dangerous from the aftermath of whatever destroyed it
in the first place.

The world has significant alien ruins present. The
locals may or may not permit others to investigate
the ruins, and may make it difficult to remove any
objects of value without substantial payment. Any
surviving ruins with worthwhile salvage almost certainly have some defense or hazard to explain their
unplundered state.
E

E

Customs inspector, Worshipper of the ruins,
Hidden alien survivor

F

Curious scholar, Avaricious local resident, Interstellar smuggler

C

Traps in the ruins, Remote location, Paranoid
customs officials

T

Precious alien artifacts, Objects left with the
remains of a prior unsuccessful expedition, Untranslated alien texts, Untouched hidden ruins

P

Undersea ruin, Orbital ruin, Perfectly preserved
alien building, Alien mausoleum

F

Crazed survivors, Ruthless plunderers of the
ruins, Automated defense system
Inquisitive stellar archaeologist, Heir to the colony’s property, Local wanting the place cleaned
out and made safe

C

The local government wants the ruins to remain
a secret, The locals claim ownership of it, The
colony is crumbling and dangerous to navigate

T

Long-lost property deeds, Relic stolen by the
colonists when they left, Historical record of
the colonization attempt
Decaying habitation block, Vine-covered town
square, Structure buried by an ancient landslide

P

Altered Humanity

Anarchists

The humans on this world are visibly and drastically different from normal humanity. They may have
additional limbs, new sensory organs, or other significant changes. Were these from ancestral eugenic
manipulation, strange stellar mutations, or from an
environmental toxin unique to this world?

Rather than being an incidental anarchy of struggling
tribes and warring factions, this world actually has a
functional society with no centralized authority. Authority might be hyper-localized to extended families,
specific religious parishes, or voluntary associations.
Some force is preventing an outside group or internal
malcontents from coalescing into a power capable of
imposing its rule on the locals; this force might be an
ancient pretech defense system, a benevolent military
AI, or the sheer obscurity and isolation of the culture.

E
F
C
T

P

Biochauvinist local, Local experimenter, Mentally unstable mutant
Local seeking a “cure”, Curious xenophiliac, Anthropological researcher
Alteration is contagious, Alteration is necessary
for long-term survival, Locals fear and mistrust
non-local humans
Original pretech mutagenic equipment, Valuable biological byproduct from the mutants,
“Cure” for the altered genes, Record of the original colonial genotypes
Abandoned eugenics laboratory, An environment requiring the mutation for survival, A
sacred site where the first local was transformed

E
F

Offworlder imperialist, Reformer seeking to
impose “good government”, Exploiter taking
advantage of the lack of centralized resistance
Proud missionary for anarchy, Casual local free
spirit, Curious offworlder political scientist

C

The anarchistic structure is compelled by an
external power, The anarchy is enabled by currently abundant resources, The protecting force
that shelters the anarchy is waning

T

A macguffin that would let the possessor enforce
their rule on others, A vital resource needed to
preserve general liberty, Tech forbidden as disruptive to the social order

P

Community of similar-sized homes, Isolated
clan homestead, Automated mining site

134• WORLD TAGS

Anthropomorphs

Area 51

The locals were originally human, but at some point
became anthropomorphic, either as an ancient furry
colony, a group of animal-worshiping sectarians, or
gengineers who just happened to find animal elements most convenient for surviving on the world.
Depending on the skill of the original gengineers,
their feral forms may or may not work as well as their
original human bodies, or may come with drawbacks
inherited from their animal elements.

The world’s government is fully aware of their local
stellar neighbors, but the common populace has no
idea about it- and the government means to keep
it that way. Trade with government officials in remote locations is possible, but any attempt to clue the
commoners in on the truth will be met with lethal
reprisals.
E

Suspicious government minder, Free merchant
who likes his local monopoly, Local who wants
a specimen for dissection

E

Anthro-supremacist local, Native driven by feral
urges, Outside exploiter who sees the locals as
subhuman creatures

F

F

Fascinated genetic researcher, Diplomat trained
to deal with normals, Local needing outside help

Crusading offworld investigator, Conspiracy-theorist local, Idealistic government reformer

C

C

The locals consider their shapes a curse from
their foolish ancestors, Society is ordered according to animal forms, The locals view normal
humans as repulsive or inferior

The government has a good reason to keep the
truth concealed, The government ruthlessly oppresses the natives, The government is actually
composed of offworlders

T

Elaborate spy devices, Memory erasure tech,
Possessions of the last offworlder who decided
to spread the truth
Desert airfield, Deep subterranean bunker, Hidden mountain valley

T
P

Pretech gengineering tech, A “cure” that may not
be wanted, Sacred feral totem
Shrine to a feral deity, Nature preserve suited to
an animal type, Living site built to take advantage of animal traits

P

WORLD TAGS •135
Badlands World

Battleground

Whatever the original climate and atmosphere type,
something horrible happened to this world. Biological, chemical, or nanotechnical weaponry has
reduced it to a wretched hellscape. Some local life
might still be able to survive on its blasted surface,
usually at some dire cost in health or humanity.

The world is a battleground for two or more outside
powers. They may be interstellar rivals, or groups
operating out of orbitals or other system bodies.
Something about the planet is valuable enough for
them to fight over, but the natives are too weak to be
anything but animate obstacles to the fight.

E

E

F

Mutated badlands fauna, Desperate local, Badlands raider chief
Native desperately wishing to escape the world,
Scientist researching ecological repair methods,
Ruin scavenger

C

Radioactivity, Bioweapon traces, Broken terrain,
Sudden local plague

T

Maltech research core, Functional pretech
weaponry, An uncontaminated well
Untouched oasis, Ruined city, Salt flat

P

F
C

T
P

Ruthless military commander, Looter pack
chieftain, Traitorous collaborator
Native desperately seeking protection, Pragmatic military officer, Hapless war orphan
The war just ended as both sides are leaving, The
natives somehow brought this on themselves, A
small group of natives profit tremendously from
the fighting
A cache of the resource the invaders seek, Abandoned prototype military gear, Precious spy intelligence lost by someone
Artillery-pocked wasteland, Reeking refugee
camp, Burnt-out shell of a city

Beastmasters

Bubble Cities

The natives have extremely close bonds with the local
fauna, possibly having special means of communication and control through tech or gengineering. Local
animal life plays a major role in their society, industry, or warfare, and new kinds of beasts may be bred
to suit their purposes.

Whether due to a lack of atmosphere or an uninhabitable climate, the world’s cities exist within domes or
pressurized buildings. In such sealed environments,
techniques of surveillance and control can grow baroque and extreme.

E
F
C
T
P

Half-feral warlord of a beast swarm, Coldly inhuman scientist, Altered beast with human intellect and furious malice
Native bonded with an adorable animal, Herder
of very useful beasts, Animal-revering mystic
The “animals” are very heavily gengineered humans, The animals actually run the society, The
animals have the same rights as humans
Tech used to alter animal life, A plague vial that
could wipe out the animals, A pretech device
that can perform a wonder if operated by a beast
Park designed as a comfortable home for beasts,
Public plaza designed to accommodate animal
companions, Factory full of animal workers

E

Native dreading outsider contamination, Saboteur from another bubble city, Local official
hostile to outsider ignorance of laws

F

Local rebel against the city officials, Maintenance chief in need of help, Surveyor seeking
new building sites

C

Bubble rupture, Failing atmosphere reprocessor, Native revolt against officials, All-seeing
surveillance cameras
Pretech habitat technology, Valuable industrial
products, Master key codes to a city’s security
system
City power core, Surface of the bubble, Hydroponics complex, Warren-like hab block

T
P

136• WORLD TAGS
Cheap Life

Civil War

Human life is near-worthless on this world. Ubiquitous cloning, local conditions that ensure early death,
a culture that reveres murder, or a social structure
that utterly discounts the value of most human lives
ensures that death is the likely outcome for any action that irritates someone consequential.

The world is currently torn between at least two opposing factions, all of which claim legitimacy. The
war may be the result of a successful rebel uprising
against tyranny, or it might just be the result of
schemers who plan to be the new masters once the
revolution is complete.

E

Master assassin, Bloody-handed judge, Overseer
of disposable clones

E

F

Endearing local whose life the PCs accidentally bought, Escapee from death seeking outside
help, Reformer trying to change local mores
Radiation or local diseases ensure all locals die
before twenty-five years of age, Tech ensures
that death is just an annoyance, Locals are totally
convinced of a blissful afterlife

Faction commissar, Angry native, Conspiracy
theorist who blames offworlders for the war,
Deserter looking out for himself, Guerrilla bandit chieftain

F

Faction loyalist seeking aid, Native caught in
the crossfire, Offworlder seeking passage off
the planet
The front rolls over the group, Famine strikes,
Bandit infestations are in the way

C

T
P

Device that revives or re-embodies the dead,
Maltech engine fueled by human life, Priceless
treasure held by a now-dead owner
Thronging execution ground, extremely cursory cemetery, Factory full of lethal dangers that
could be corrected easily

C
T

Ammo dump, Military cache, Treasure buried
for after the war, Secret war plans

P

Battle front, Bombed-out town, Rear-area red
light zone, Propaganda broadcast tower

Cold War

Colonized Population

Two or more great powers control the planet, and
they have a hostility to each other that’s just barely
less than open warfare. The hostility might be ideological in nature, or it might revolve around control
of some local resource.

A neighboring world has successfully colonized this
less-advanced or less-organized planet, and the natives aren’t happy about it. A puppet government
may exist, but all real decisions are made by the local
viceroy.

E

E

Suspicious security personnel, Offworlder-hating natives, Local crime boss preying on rich
offworlders

F

Native resistance leader, Colonial official seeking help, Native caught between the two sides

C
T

Natives won’t talk to offworlders, Colonial repression, Misunderstood local customs
Relic of the resistance movement, List of collaborators, Precious substance extracted by colonial
labor

P

Deep wilderness resistance camp, City district
off-limits to natives, Colonial labor site

F
C

T
P

Suspicious chief of intelligence, Native who
thinks the outworlders are with the other side,
Femme fatale
Apolitical information broker, Spy for the other
side, Unjustly accused innocent, “He’s a bastard,
but he’s our bastard” official
Police sweep, Low-level skirmishing, “Red scare”
List of traitors in government, secret military
plans, Huge cache of weapons built up in preparation for war
Seedy bar in a neutral area, Political rally, Isolated area where fighting is underway

WORLD TAGS •137
Cultural Power

Cybercommunists

The world is a considerable cultural power in the
sector, producing music, art, philosophy, or some
similar intangible that their neighbors find irresistibly attractive. Other worlds might have a profound
degree of cultural cachet as the inheritor of some
venerable artistic tradition.

On this world communism actually works, thanks
to pretech computing devices and greater or lesser
amounts of psychic precognition. Central planning
nodes direct all production and employment on the
world. Citizens in good standing have access to ample
amounts of material goods for all needs and many
wants. Instead of strife over wealth, conflicts erupt
over political controls, cultural precepts, or control
over the planning nodes. Many cybercommunist
worlds show a considerable bias toward the private
interests of those who run the planning nodes.

E
F

Murderously eccentric artist, Crazed fan, Failed
artist with an obsessive grudge, Critic with a
crusade to enact
Struggling young artist, Pupil of the artistic tradition, Scholar of the art, Offworlder hating the
source of corrupting alien ways

C

The art is slowly lethal to its masters, The art
is mentally or physically addictive, The art is a
fragment of ancient technical or military science

T

The instrument of a legendary master, The only
copy of a dead master’s opus, Proof of intellectual property ownership

P

Recording or performance studio, Public festival choked with tourists, Monument to a dead
master of the art

E
F

Embittered rebel against perceived unfairness,
Offworlder saboteur, Aspiring Stalin-figure
Idealistic planning node tech, Cynical anti-corruption cop, Precognitive economist

C

The pretech planning computers are breaking
down, The planning only works because the
locals have been mentally or physically altered,
The planning computers can’t handle the increasing population within the system

T

Planning node computer, Wildly destabilizing
commodity that can’t be factored into plans, A
tremendous store of valuables made by accident

P

Humming factory, Apartment block of perfectly
equal flats, Mass demonstration of unity

Cyborgs

Cyclical Doom

The planet’s population makes heavy use of cybernetics, with many of the inhabitants possessing at
least a cosmetic amount of chrome. This may be the
result of a strong local cyber tech base, a religious
injunction, or simply a necessary measure to survive
the local conditions.

The world regularly suffers some apocalyptic catastrophe that wipes out organized civilization on it.
The local culture is aware of this cycle and has traditions to ensure a fragment of civilization survives
into the next era, but these traditions don’t always
work properly, and sometimes dangerous fragments
of the past emerge.

E

Ambitious hacker of cyber implants, Cybertech
oligarch, Researcher craving fresh offworlders,
Cybered-up gang boss

F

Charity-working implant physician, Idealistic
young cyber researcher, Avant-garde activist

C

The powerful and dangerous come here often
for cutting-edge implants, The cyber has some
universal negative side-effect, Cyber and those
implanted with it are forbidden to leave the
planet as a tech security measure

T
P

Unique prototype cyber implant, Secret research
files, A virus that debilitates cyborgs, A cache of
critically-needed therapeutic cyber
Grimy slum chop-shop, Bloody lair of implant
rippers, Stark plaza where everyone is seeing
things through their augmented-reality cyber

E

F

Offworlder seeking to trigger the apocalypse
early for profit, Local recklessly taking advantage of preparation stores, Demagogue claiming
the cycle is merely a myth of the authorities
Harried official working to prepare, Offworlder
studying the cycles, Local threatened by perils of
the cycle’s initial stages

C

The cycles really are a myth of the authorities,
The cycles are controlled by alien constructs, An
outside power is interfering with preparation

T

A lost cache of ancient treasures, Tech or archives that will pinpoint the cycle’s timing, Keycodes to bypass an ancient vault’s security

P

Lethally-defended vault of forgotten secrets,
Starport crowded with panicked refugees, Town
existing in the shadow of some monstrous monument to a former upheaval

138• WORLD TAGS
Desert World

Doomed World

The world may have a breathable atmosphere and a
human-tolerable temperature range, but it is an arid,
stony waste outside of a few places made habitable
by human effort. The deep wastes are largely unexplored and inhabited by outcasts and worse.

The world is doomed, and the locals may or may not
know it. Some cosmic catastrophe looms before them,
and the locals have no realistic way to get everyone to
safety. To the extent that the public is aware, society
is disintegrating into a combination of religious fervor, abject hedonism, and savage violence.

E

Raider chieftain, Crazed hermit, Angry isolationists, Paranoid mineral prospector, Strange
desert beast

F

Native guide, Research biologist, Aspiring terraformer

C

Sandstorms, Water supply failure, Native warfare over water rights

T

Enormous water reservoir, Map of hidden wells,
Pretech rainmaking equipment
Oasis, “The Empty Quarter” of the desert, Hidden underground cistern

P

E

Crazed prophet of a false salvation, Ruthless
leader seeking to flee with their treasures, Cynical ship captain selling a one-way trip into hard
vacuum as escape to another world

F

Appealing waif or family head seeking escape,
Offworld relief coordinator, Harried law officer

C

The doom is false or won’t actually kill everyone,
The doom was intentionally triggered by someone, Mass escape is possible if warring groups
can somehow be brought to cooperate
Clearance for a ship to leave the planet, A cache
of priceless cultural artifacts, The life savings of
someone trying to buy passage out, Data that
would prove to the public the end is nigh

T

P

Open square beneath a sky angry with a foretaste of th impending ruin, Orgiastic celebration
involving sex and murder in equal parts, Holy
site full of desperate petitioners to the divine

Dying Race

Eugenic Cult

The inhabitants of this world are dying out, and they
know it. Through environmental toxins, hostile
bio-weapons, or sheer societal despair, the culture
cannot replenish its numbers. Members seek meaning in their own strange goals or peculiar faiths,
though a few might struggle to find some way to
reverse their slow yet inevitable doom.

Even in the days before the Silence, major improvement of the human genome always seemed to come
with unacceptable side-effects. Some worlds host
secret cults that perpetuate these improvements
regardless of the cost, and a few planets have been
taken over entirely by the cults.

E

Hostile outsider who wants the locals dead, Offworlder seeking to take advantage of their weakened state, Invaders eager to push the locals out
of their former lands

F

One of the few youth among the population,
Determined and hopeful reformer, Researcher
seeking a new method of reproduction

C

The dying culture’s values were monstrous, The
race’s death is somehow necessary to prevent
some grand catastrophe, The race is somehow
convinced they deserve this fate

T

Extremely valuable reproductive tech, Treasured artifacts of the former age, Bioweapon
used on the race

P

City streets devoid of pedestrians, Mighty edifice
now crumbling with disrepair, Small dwelling
full of people in a town now otherwise empty

E

Eugenic superiority fanatic, Mentally unstable
homo superior, Mad eugenic scientist

F

Eugenic propagandist, Biotechnical investigator,
Local seeking revenge on cult
The altered cultists look human, The locals are
terrified of any unusual physical appearance,
The genetic modifications- and drawbacks- are
contagious with long exposure

C

T

Serum that induces the alteration, Elixir that
reverses the alteration, Pretech biotechnical databanks, List of secret cult sympathizers

P

Eugenic breeding pit, Isolated settlement of
altered humans, Public place infiltrated by cult
sympathizers

WORLD TAGS •139

Exchange Consulate

Fallen Hegemon

The Exchange of Light once served as the largest,
most trusted banking and diplomatic service in human space. Even after the Silence, some worlds retain
a functioning Exchange Consulate where banking
services and arbitration can be arranged.

At some point in the past, this world was a hegemonic power over some or all of the sector, thanks to superior tech, expert diplomacy, the weakness of their
neighbors, or inherited Mandate legitimacy. Some
kind of crash or revolt broke their power, however,
and now the world is littered with the wreckage of
former glory.

E

F

Corrupt Exchange official, Indebted native
who thinks the players are Exchange agents,
Exchange official dunning the players for debts
incurred
Consul in need of offworld help, Local banker
seeking to hurt his competition, Exchange diplomat

C

The local Consulate has been corrupted, the
Consulate is cut off from its funds, A powerful
debtor refuses to pay

T

Exchange vault codes, Wealth hidden to conceal it from a bankruptcy judgment, Location
of forgotten vault

P

Consulate meeting chamber, Meeting site between fractious disputants, Exchange vault

E

Bitter pretender to a meaningless throne, Resentful official dreaming of empire, Vengeful
offworlder seeking to punish their old rulers

F

Realistic local leader trying to hold things together, Scholar of past glories, Refugee from an
overthrown colonial enclave
The hegemon’s rule was enlightened and fair, It
collapsed due to its own internal strife rather
than external resistance, It pretends that nothing
has happened to its power, It’s been counter-colonized by vengeful outsiders
Precious insignia of former rule, Relic tech important to its power, Plundered colonial artifact

C

T
P

Palace far too grand for its current occupant,
Oversized spaceport now in disrepair, Boulevard lined with monuments to past glories

140• WORLD TAGS
Feral World

Flying Cities

In the long, isolated night of the Silence, some worlds
have experienced total moral and cultural collapse.
Whatever remains has been twisted beyond recognition into assorted death cults, xenophobic fanaticism,
horrific cultural practices, or other behavior unacceptable on more enlightened worlds. These worlds
are almost invariably quarantined by other planets.

Perhaps the world is a gas giant, or plagued with unendurable storms at lower levels of the atmosphere.
For whatever reason, the cities of this world fly
above the surface of the planet. Perhaps they remain
stationary, or perhaps they move from point to point
in search of resources.

E

Decadent noble, Mad cultist, Xenophobic local,
Cannibal chief, Maltech researcher

F

Trapped outworlder, Aspiring reformer, Native
wanting to avoid traditional flensing
Horrific local “celebration”, Inexplicable and repugnant social rules, Taboo zones and people

C

E
F
C

Rival city pilot, Tech thief attempting to steal
outworld gear, Saboteur or scavenger plundering the city’s tech
Maintenance tech in need of help, City defense
force pilot, Meteorological researcher
Sudden storms, Drastic altitude loss, Rival city
attacks, Vital machinery breaks down

T

Terribly misused piece of pretech, Wealth accumulated through brutal evildoing, Valuable
possession owned by luckless outworlder victim

T

Precious refined atmospheric gases, Pretech
grav engine plans, Meteorological codex predicting future storms

P

Atrocity amphitheater, Traditional torture parlor, Ordinary location twisted into something
terrible.

P

Underside of the city, The one calm place on
the planet’s surface, Catwalks stretching over
unimaginable gulfs below.

Forbidden Tech

Former Warriors

Some group on this planet fabricates or uses maltech.
Unbraked AIs doomed to metastasize into insanity,
nation-destroying nanowarfare particles, slow-burn
DNA corruptives, genetically engineered slaves, or
something worse still. The planet’s larger population
may or may not be aware of the danger in their midst.

The locals of this world were once famed for their
martial prowess. They may have simply had a very
militaristic culture, or were genetically engineered
for combat, or developed high-tech weaponry, or had
brilliant leadership. Those days are past, however, either due to crushing defeat, external restrictions, or
a cultural turn toward peace.

E

Mad scientist, Maltech buyer from offworld, Security enforcer

F

Victim of maltech, Perimeter agent, Investigative reporter, Conventional arms merchant
The maltech is being fabricated by an unbraked
AI, The government depends on revenue from
maltech sales to offworlders, Citizens insist that
it’s not really maltech

C

T

Maltech research data, The maltech itself, Precious pretech equipment used to create it

P

Horrific laboratory, Hellscape sculpted by the
maltech’s use, Government building meeting
room

E
F

Unreformed warlord leader, Bitter mercenary
chief, Victim of their warfare seeking revenge
Partisan of the new peaceful ways, Outsider desperate for military aid, Martial genius repressed
by the new dispensation

C

Neighboring worlds want them pacified or dead,
They only ever used their arts in self-defense,
The source of their gifts has been “turned off” in
a reversible way

T

War trophy taken from a defeated foe, Key to
re-activating their martial ways, Secret cache of
high-tech military gear

P

Cemetery of dead heroes, Memorial hall now
left to dust and silence, Monument plaza dedicated to the new culture

WORLD TAGS •141
Freak Geology

Freak Weather

The geology or geography of this world is simply
freakish. Perhaps it’s composed entirely of enormous
mountain ranges, or regular bands of land and sea, or
the mineral structures all fragment into perfect cubes.
The locals have learned to deal with it and their culture will be shaped by its requirements.

The planet is plagued with some sort of bizarre or
hazardous weather pattern. Perhaps city-flattening
storms regularly scourge the surface, or the world’s
sun never pierces its thick banks of clouds.

E
F
C
T
P

Crank xenogeologist, Cultist who believes it the
work of aliens
Research scientist, Prospector, Artist
Local conditions that no one remembers to tell
outworlders about, Lethal weather, Seismic activity
Unique crystal formations, Hidden veins of a
major precious mineral strike, Deed to a location of great natural beauty
Atop a bizarre geological formation, Tourist resort catering to offworlders

E

F
C

Criminal using the weather as a cover, Weather
cultists convinced the offworlders are responsible for some disaster, Native predators dependent on the weather
Meteorological researcher, Holodoc crew wanting shots of the weather
The weather itself, Malfunctioning pretech terraforming engines that cause the weather

T

Wind-scoured deposits of precious minerals,
Holorecords of a spectacularly and rare weather
pattern, Naturally-sculpted objects of intricate
beauty

P

Eye of the storm, The one sunlit place, Terraforming control room

Friendly Foe

Gold Rush

Some hostile alien race or malevolent cabal has a
branch or sect on this world that is actually quite
friendly toward outsiders. For whatever internal reason, they are willing to negotiate and deal honestly
with strangers, and appear to lack the worst impulses
of their fellows.

Gold, silver, and other conventional precious minerals are common and cheap now that asteroid mining is practical for most worlds. But some minerals
and compounds remain precious and rare, and this
world has recently been discovered to have a supply
of them. People from across the sector have come to
strike it rich.

E

Driven hater of all their kind, Internal malcontent bent on creating conflict, Secret master who
seeks to lure trust

F
C

T
P

E

Paranoid prospector, Aspiring mining tycoon,
Rapacious merchant

Well-meaning bug-eyed monster, Principled
eugenics cultist, Suspicious investigator

F

The group actually is as harmless and benevolent
as they seem, The group offers a vital service
at the cost of moral compromise, The group
still feels bonds of affiliation with their hostile
brethren
Forbidden xenotech, Eugenic biotech template,
Evidence to convince others of their kind that
they are right
Repurposed maltech laboratory, Alien conclave
building, Widely-feared starship interior

C

Claim-jumped miner, Native alien, Curious
tourist
The strike is a hoax, The strike is of a dangerous
toxic substance, Export of the mineral is prohibited by the planetary government, The native
aliens live around the strike’s location

T

Cases of the refined element, Pretech mining
equipment, A dead prospector’s claim deed

P

Secret mine, Native alien village, Processing
plant, Boom town

142• WORLD TAGS
Great Work

Hatred

The locals are obsessed with completing a massive
project, one that has consumed them for generations. It might be the completion of a functioning
spaceyard, a massive solar power array, a network of
terraforming engines, or the universal conversion of
their neighbors to their own faith. The purpose of
their entire civilization is to progress and some day
complete the work.

For whatever reason, this world’s populace has a
burning hatred for the inhabitants of a neighboring
system. Perhaps this world was colonized by exiles, or
there was a recent interstellar war, or ideas of racial
or religious superiority have fanned the hatred. Regardless of the cause, the locals view their neighbor
and any sympathizers with loathing.

E

F
C
T
P

Local planning to sacrifice the PCs for the work,
Local who thinks the PCs threaten the work,
Obsessive zealot ready to destroy someone or
something important to the PCs for the sake of
the work
Outsider studying the work, Local with a more
temperate attitude, Supplier of work materials
The work is totally hopeless, Different factions
disagree on what the work is, An outside power
is determined to thwart the work
Vital supplies for the work, Plans that have been
lost, Tech that greatly speeds the work
A bustling work site, Ancestral worker housing,
Local community made only semi-livable by the
demands of the work

E

Native convinced that the offworlders are agents
of Them, Cynical politician in need of scapegoats

F
C

Intelligence agent needing catspaws, Holodoc
producers needing “an inside look”, Unlucky
offworlder from the hated system
The characters are wearing or using items from
the hated world, The characters are known to
have done business there, The characters “look
like” the hated others

T

Proof of Their evildoing, Reward for turning in
enemy agents, Relic stolen by Them years ago

P

War crimes museum, Atrocity site, Captured
and decommissioned spaceship kept as a trophy

Heavy Industry

Heavy Mining

With interstellar transport so limited in the bulk it
can move, worlds have to be largely self-sufficient
in industry. Some worlds are more sufficient than
others, however, and this planet has a thriving manufacturing sector capable of producing large amounts
of goods appropriate to its tech level. The locals may
enjoy a correspondingly higher lifestyle, or the products might be devoted towards vast projects for the
aggrandizement of the rulers.

This world has large stocks of valuable minerals,
usually necessary for local industry, life support, or
refinement into loads small enough to export offworld. Major mining efforts are necessary to extract
the minerals, and many natives work in the industry.

E

Tycoon monopolist, Industrial spy, Malcontent
revolutionary

F

Aspiring entrepreneur, Worker union leader,
Ambitious inventor

C

The factories are toxic, The resources extractable at their tech level are running out, The
masses require the factory output for survival,
The industries’ major output is being obsoleted
by offworld tech
Confidential industrial data, Secret union membership lists, Ownership shares in an industrial
complex
Factory floor, Union meeting hall, Toxic waste
dump, R&D complex

T
P

E
F
C
T
P

Mine boss, Tunnel saboteur, Subterranean
predators
Hermit prospector, Offworld investor, Miner’s
union representative
The refinery equipment breaks down, Tunnel
collapse, Silicate life forms growing in the miners’ lungs
The mother lode, Smuggled case of refined mineral, Faked crystalline mineral samples
Vertical mine face, Tailing piles, Roaring smelting complex

WORLD TAGS •143
Hivemind

Holy War

Natives of this world exist in a kind of mental gestalt,
sharing thoughts and partaking of a single identity.
Powerful pretech, exotic psionics, alien influence, or
some other cause has left the world sharing one identity. Individual members may have greater or lesser
degrees of effective coordination with the whole.

A savage holy war is raging on this world, either between factions of locals or as a united effort against
the pagans of some neighboring world. This war
might involve a conventional religion, or it might be
the result of a branding campaign, political ideology,
artistic movement, or any other cause that people use
as a substitute for traditional religion.

E
F

A hivemind that wants to assimilate outsiders, A
hivemind that has no respect for unjoined life, A
hivemind that fears and hates unjoined life
A scholar studying the hivemind, A person severed from the gestalt, A relative of someone who
has been assimilated

C

The hivemind only functions on this world, The
hivemind has strict range limits, The hivemind
has different personality factions, The hivemind
only happens at particular times, The world is
made of semi-sentient drones and a single AI

T

Vital tech for maintaining the mind, Precious
treasure held by now-assimilated outsider, Tech
that “blinds” the hivemind to the tech’s users

P

Barely tolerable living cells for individuals,
Workside where individuals casually die in their
labors, Community with absolutely no social or
group-gathering facilities

E

Blood-mad pontiff, Coldly cynical secular leader,
Totalitarian political demagogue

F

Desperate peacemaker, Hard-pressed refugee of
the fighting, Peaceful religious leader who lost
the internal debate

C

The targets of the war really are doing something diabolically horrible, The holy war is just a
mask for a very traditional casus belli, The leaders don’t want the war won but only prolonged,
Both this world and the target of the war are
religion-obsessed
Sacred relic of the faith, A captured blasphemer
under a death sentence, Plunder seized in battle

T
P

Massive holy structure, Razed community of
infidels, Vast shrine to the martyrs dead in war

Hostile Biosphere

Hostile Space

The world is teeming with life, and it hates humans.
Perhaps the life is xenoallergenic, forcing filter masks
and tailored antiallergens for survival. It could be the
native predators are huge and fearless, or the toxic
flora ruthlessly outcompetes earth crops.

The system in which the world exists is a dangerous
neighborhood. Something about the system is perilous to inhabitants, either through meteor swarms,
stellar radiation, hostile aliens in the asteroid belt, or
periodic comet clouds.

E

E

Alien raid leader, Meteor-launching terrorists,
Paranoid local leader

F

Astronomic researcher, Local defense commander, Early warning monitor agent

C

The natives believe the danger is divine chastisement, The natives blame outworlders for the
danger, The native elite profit from the danger
in some way
Early warning of a raid or impact, Abandoned
riches in a disaster zone, Key to a secure bunker
City watching an approaching asteroid, Village
burnt in an alien raid, Massive ancient crater

F

Local fauna, Nature cultist, Native aliens, Callous labor overseer
Xenobiologist, Tourist on safari, Grizzled local
guide

C

Filter masks fail, Parasitic alien infestation, Crop
greenhouses lose bio-integrity

T

Valuable native biological extract, Abandoned
colony vault, Remains of an unsuccessful expedition

P

Deceptively peaceful glade, Steaming polychrome jungle, Nightfall when surrounded by
Things

T
P

144• WORLD TAGS
Immortals

Local Specialty

Natives of this world are effectively immortal. They
may have been gengineered for tremendous lifespans,
or have found some local anagathic, or be cyborg life
forms, or be so totally convinced of reincarnation
that death is a cultural irrelevance. Any immortality
technique is likely applicable only to them, or else
it’s apt to be a massive draw to outside imperialists.

The world may be sophisticated or barely capable of
steam engines, but either way it produces something
rare and precious to the wider galaxy. It might be
some pharmaceutical extract produced by a secret
recipe, a remarkably popular cultural product, or
even gengineered humans uniquely suited for certain work.

E

Outsider determined to steal immortality, Smug
local convinced of their immortal wisdom to
rule all, Offworlder seeking the world’s ruin
before it becomes a threat to all

E

Monopolist, Offworlder seeking prohibition of
the specialty, Native who views the specialty as
sacred

F

Curious longevity researcher, Thrill-seeking
local,
Immortality requires doing something that outsiders can’t or won’t willingly do, The immortality ends if they leave the world, Death is the
punishment for even minor crimes, Immortals
must die or go offworld after a certain span, Immortality has brutal side-effects
Immortality drug, Masterwork of an ageless artisan, Toxin that only affects immortals
Community with no visible children, Unchanging structure of obvious ancient age, Cultural
performance relying on a century of in-jokes

F

Spy searching for the source, Artisan seeking
protection, Exporter with problems
The specialty is repugnant in nature, The crafters refuse to sell to offworlders, The specialty is
made in a remote, dangerous place, The crafters
don’t want to make the specialty any more
The specialty itself, The secret recipe, Sample of
a new improved variety

C

T
P

C

T
P

Secret manufactory, Hidden cache, Artistic competition for best artisan

Local Tech

Major Spaceyard

The locals can create a particular example of extremely high tech, possibly even something that exceeds pretech standards. They may use unique local
resources to do so, or have stumbled on a narrow
scientific breakthrough, or still have a functional experimental manufactory.

Most worlds of tech level 4 or greater have the necessary tech and orbital facilities to build spike drives
and starships. This world is blessed with a major
spaceyard facility, either inherited from before the
Silence or painstakingly constructed in more recent
decades. It can build even capital-class hulls, and do
so more quickly and cheaply than its neighbors.

E

Keeper of the tech, Offworld industrialist, Automated defenses that suddenly come alive, Native
alien mentors

F

Curious offworld scientist, Eager tech buyer,
Native in need of technical help
The tech is unreliable, The tech only works on
this world, The tech has poorly-understood side
effects, The tech is alien in nature.

C
T
P

The tech itself, An unclaimed payment for a
large shipment, The secret blueprints for its
construction, An ancient alien R&D database
Alien factory, Lethal R&D center, Tech brokerage vault

E

Enemy saboteur, Industrial spy, Scheming construction tycoon, Aspiring ship hijacker

F

Captain stuck in drydock, Maintenance chief,
Mad innovator

C

The spaceyard is an alien relic, The spaceyard
is burning out from overuse, The spaceyard is
alive, The spaceyard relies on maltech to function
Intellectual property-locked pretech blueprints,
Override keys for activating old pretech facilities,
A purchased but unclaimed spaceship.
Hidden shipyard bay, Surface of a partially-completed ship, Ship scrap graveyard

T
P

WORLD TAGS •145
Mandarinate

Mandate Base

The planet is ruled by an intellectual elite chosen via
ostensibly neutral examinations or tests. The values
this system selects for may or may not have anything
to do with actual practical leadership skills, and the
examinations may be more or less corruptible.

The Terran Mandate retained its control over this
world for much longer than usual, and the world
may still consider itself a true inheritor of Mandate
legitimacy. Most of these worlds have or had superior
technology, but they may still labor under the burden
of ancient restrictive tech or monitoring systems designed to prevent them from rebelling.

E

Corrupt test administrator, Incompetent but
highly-rated graduate, Ruthless leader of a clan
of high-testing relations

F

Crusader for test reform, Talented but poorly-connected graduate, Genius who tests badly

C

The test is totally unrelated to necessary governing skills, The test was very pertinent in the
past but tech or culture has changed, The test
is for a skill that is vital to maintaining society
but irrelevant to day-to-day governance, The
test is a sham and passage is based on wealth
or influence
Answer key to the next test, Lost essay of incredible merit, Proof of cheating

T
P

Massive structure full of test-taking cubicles,
School filled with desperate students, Ornate
government building decorated with scholarly
quotes and academic images

E

Deranged Mandate monitoring AI, Aspiring
sector ruler, Demagogue preaching local superiority over “traitorous rebel worlds”.

F

Idealistic do-gooder local, Missionary for advanced Mandate tech, Outsider seeking lost data
from Mandate records

C

The monitoring system forces the locals to behave in aggressive ways toward “rebel” worlds,
The monitoring system severely hinders offworld use of their tech, The original colonists
are all dead and have been replaced by outsiders
who don’t understand all the details
Ultra-advanced pretech, Mandate military gear,
Databank containing precious tech schematics

T
P

Faded Mandate offices still in use, Vault containing ancient pretech, Carefully-maintained
monument to Mandate glory

Maneaters

Megacorps

The locals are cannibals, either out of necessity or out
of cultural preference. Some worlds may actually eat
human flesh, while others simply require the rendering of humans into important chemicals or pharmaceutical compounds, perhaps to prolong the lives of
ghoul overlords. This cannibalism plays a major role
in their society.

The world is dominated by classic cyberpunk-esque
megacorporations, each one far more important than
the vestigial national remnants that encompass them.
These megacorps are usually locked in a cold war,
trading and dealing with each other even as they try
to strike in deniable ways. An over-council of corporations usually acts to bring into line any that get
excessively overt in their activities.

E

Ruthless ghoul leader, Chieftain of a ravenous
tribe, Sophisticated degenerate preaching the
splendid authenticity of cannibalism

F

Sympathetic local fleeing the fork, Escapee from
a pharmaceutical rendering plant, Outsider chosen for dinner, Reformer seeking to break the
custom or its necessity

C

E

Megalomaniacal executive, Underling looking
to use the PCs as catspaws, Ruthless mercenary
who wants what the PCs have

F

Victim of megacorp scheming, Offworlder
merchant in far over their head, Local reformer
struggling to cope with megacorp indifference

Local food or environmental conditions make
human consumption grimly necessary, The locals farm human beings, Outsiders are expected
to join in the custom, The custom is totally unnecessary but jealously maintained by the people

C

The megacorps are the only source of something vital to life on this world, An autonomous
Mandate system acts to punish excessively overt
violence, The megacorps are struggling against
much more horrible national governments

T

Belongings of a recent meal, An offworlder VIP
due for the menu, A toxin that makes human
flesh lethal to consumers

T

P

Hideous human abattoir, Extremely civilized
restaurant, Funeral-home-cum-kitchen

Blackmail on a megacorp exec, Keycodes to critical corp secrets, Proof of corp responsibility for a
heinously unacceptable public atrocity, Data on
a vital new product line coming out soon

P

A place plastered in megacorp ads, A public plaza
discreetly branded, Private corp military base

146• WORLD TAGS
Mercenaries

Minimal Contact

The world is either famous for its mercenary bands
or it is plagued by countless groups of condottieri
in service to whatever magnate can afford to pay or
bribe them adequately.

The locals refuse most contact with offworlders.
Only a small, quarantined treaty port is provided for
offworld trade, and ships can expect an exhaustive
search for contraband. Local governments may be
trying to keep the very existence of interstellar trade
a secret from their populations, or they may simply
consider offworlders too dangerous or repugnant to
be allowed among the population.

E

Amoral mercenary leader, Rich offworlder trying to buy rule of the world, Mercenary press
gang chief forcing locals into service

F

Young and idealistic mercenary chief, Harried
leader of enfeebled national army, Offworlder
trying to hire help for a noble cause
The mercenaries are all that stand between the
locals and a hungry imperial power, The mercenaries are remnants of a former official army,
The mercenaries hardly ever actually fight as
compared to taking bribes to walk away

C

T
P

Lost mercenary payroll shipment, Forbidden
military tech, Proof of a band’s impending
treachery against their employers
Shabby camp of undisciplined mercs, Burnt-out
village occupied by mercenaries, Luxurious and
exceedingly well-defended merc leader villa

E

Customs official, Xenophobic natives, Existing
merchant who doesn’t like competition

F

Aspiring tourist, Anthropological researcher,
Offworld thief, Religious missionary
The locals carry a disease harmless to them and
lethal to outsiders, The locals hide dark purposes from offworlders, The locals have something
desperately needed but won’t bring it into the
treaty port

C

T

Contraband trade goods, Security perimeter
codes, Black market local products

P

Treaty port bar, Black market zone, Secret
smuggler landing site

Misandry/Misogyny

Night World

The culture on this world holds a particular gender in
contempt. Members of that gender are not permitted
positions of formal power, and may be restricted in
their movements and activities. Some worlds may
go so far as to scorn both traditional genders, using
gengineering techniques to hybridize or alter conventional human biology.

The world is plunged into eternal darkness. The
only life on this planet derives its energy from other
sources, such as geothermal heat, extremely volatile
chemical reactions in the planet’s soil, or light in a
non-visible spectrum. Most flora and fauna is voraciously eager to consume other life.

E
F
C

Cultural fundamentalist, Cultural missionary to
outworlders, Local rebel driven to pointless and
meaningless violence
Oppressed native, Research scientist, Offworld
emancipationist, Local reformer
The oppressed gender is restive against the customs, The oppressed gender largely supports the
customs, The customs relate to some physical
quality of the world, The oppressed gender has
had maltech gengineering done to “tame” them.

E

Monstrous thing from the night, Offworlder
finding the obscurity of the world convenient
for dark purposes, Mad scientist experimenting
with local life

F

Curious offworlder researcher, Hard-pressed
colony leader, High priest of a sect that finds
religious significance in the night

C

Daylight comes as a cataclysmic event at very
long intervals, Light causes very dangerous reactions in native life or chemicals here, The locals
have been gengineered to exist without sight
Rare chemicals created in the darkness, Light
source usable on this world, Smuggler cache
hidden here in ages past
Formlessly pitch-black wilderness, Sea without
a sun, Location defined by sounds or smells

T

Aerosol reversion formula for undoing gengineered docility, Hidden history of the world,
Pretech gengineering equipment

T

P

Shrine to the virtues of the favored gender,
Security center for controlling the oppressed,
Gengineering lab

P

WORLD TAGS •147

Nomads

Oceanic World

Most of the natives of this world are nomadic, usually
following a traditional cycle of movement through
the lands they possess. Promises of rich plunder or
local environmental perils can force these groups to
strike out against neighbors. Other groups are forced
to move constantly due to unpredictable dangers that
crop up on the planet.

The world is entirely or almost entirely covered with
liquid water. Habitations might be floating cities, or
might cling precariously to the few rocky atolls jutting up from the waves, or are planted as bubbles on
promontories deep beneath the stormy surface. Survival depends on aquaculture. Planets with inedible
alien life rely on gengineered Terran sea crops.

E

Desperate tribal leader who needs what the PCs
have, Ruthless raider chieftain, Leader seeking
to weld the nomads into an army

E

Pirate raider, Violent “salvager” gang, Tentacled
sea monster

F

Free-spirited young nomad, Dreamer imagining
a stable life, Offworlder enamored of the life
An irresistibly lethal swarm of native life forces
locals to move regularly, Ancient defense systems destroy too-long-stationary communities,
Local chemical patches require careful balancing
of exposure times to avoid side effects

F

Daredevil fisherman, Sea hermit, Sapient native
life
The liquid flux confuses grav engines too badly
for them to function on this world, Sea is corrosive or toxic, The seas are wracked by regular
storms

C

T
P

Cache of rare and precious resource, Plunder
seized by a tribal raid, Tech that makes a place
safe for long-term inhabitation
Temporary nomad camp, Oasis or resource reserve, Trackless waste that kills the unprepared

C

T

Buried pirate treasure, Location of enormous
schools of fish, Pretech water purification equipment

P

The only island on the planet, Floating spaceport, Deck of a storm-swept ship, Undersea
bubble city

148• WORLD TAGS
Out of Contact

Outpost World

The natives have been entirely out of contact with
the greater galaxy for centuries or longer. Perhaps
the original colonists were seeking to hide from the
rest of the universe, or the Silence destroyed any
means of communication. It may have been so long
that human origins on other worlds have regressed
into a topic for legends. The players might be on the
first offworld ship to land since the First Wave of
colonization a thousand years ago.

The world is only a tiny outpost of human habitation
planted by an offworld corporation or government.
Perhaps the staff is there to serve as a refueling and
repair stop for passing ships, or to oversee an automated mining and refinery complex. They might
be there to study ancient ruins, or simply serve as
a listening and monitoring post for traffic through
the system. The outpost is likely well-equipped with
defenses against casual piracy.

E

Fearful local ruler, Zealous native cleric, Sinister
power that has kept the world isolated

E

F

Scheming native noble, Heretical theologian,
UFO cultist native
Automatic defenses fire on ships that try to take
off, The natives want to stay out of contact, The
natives are highly vulnerable to offworld diseases, The native language is completely unlike any
known to the group

Space-mad outpost staffer, Outpost commander
who wants it to stay undiscovered, Undercover
saboteur

F

Lonely staffer, Fixated researcher, Overtaxed
maintenance chief

C

The alien ruin defense systems are waking up,
Atmospheric disturbances trap the group inside
the outpost for a month, Pirates raid the outpost,
The crew have become converts to a strange set
of beliefs

T

Alien relics, Vital scientific data, Secret corporate exploitation plans
Grimy recreation room, Refueling station, The
only building on the planet, A “starport” of
swept bare rock.

C

T
P

Ancient pretech equipment, Terran relic brought
from Earth, Logs of the original colonists
Long-lost colonial landing site, Court of the local ruler, Ancient defense battery controls

P

Perimeter Agency

Pilgrimage Site

Before the Silence, the Perimeter was a Terran-sponsored organization charged with rooting out use of
maltech, technology banned in human space as too
dangerous for use or experimentation. Unbraked
AIs, gengineered slave species, nanotech replicators,
weapons of planetary destruction… the Perimeter
hunted down experimenters with a great indifference to planetary laws. Most Perimeter Agencies
collapsed during the Silence, but a few managed to
hold on to their mission, though modern Perimeter
agents often find more work as conventional spies.

The world is noted for an important spiritual or historical location, and might be the sector headquarters for a widespread religion or political movement.
The site attracts wealthy pilgrims from throughout
nearby space, and those with the money necessary to
manage interstellar travel can be quite generous to
the site and its keepers. The locals tend to be fiercely
protective of the place and its reputation, and some
places may forbid the entrance of those not suitably
pious or devout.

E

Renegade Agency Director, Maltech researcher,
Paranoid intelligence chief

F

Agent in need of help, Support staffer, “Unjustly”
targeted researcher
The local Agency has gone rogue and now uses
maltech, The Agency archives have been compromised, The Agency has been targeted by a
maltech-using organization, The Agency’s existence is unknown to the locals
Agency maltech research archives, Agency pretech spec-ops gear, File of blackmail on local
politicians

C

T
P

Interrogation room, Smoky bar, Maltech laboratory, Secret Agency base

E
F

Saboteur devoted to a rival belief, Bitter reformer who resents the current leadership, Swindler
conning the pilgrims
Protector of the holy site, Naive offworlder pilgrim, Outsider wanting to learn the sanctum’s
inner secrets

C

The site is actually a fake, The site is run by
corrupt and venal keepers, A natural disaster
threatens the site

T

Ancient relic guarded at the site, Proof of the
site’s inauthenticity, Precious offering from a
pilgrim

P

Incense-scented sanctum, Teeming crowd of
pilgrims, Imposing holy structure

WORLD TAGS •149
Pleasure World

Police State

This world provides delights either rare or impermissible elsewhere. Matchless local beauty, stunningly
gengineered natives, a wide variety of local drugs,
carnal pleasures unacceptable on other worlds, or
some other rare delight is readily available here. Most
worlds are fully aware of the value of their offerings,
and the prices they demand can be in credits or in less
tangible recompense.

The world is a totalitarian police state. Any sign of
disloyalty to the planet’s rulers is punished severely,
and suspicion riddles society. Some worlds might operate by Soviet-style informers and indoctrination,
while more technically sophisticated worlds might
rely on omnipresent cameras or braked AI “guardian
angels”. Outworlders are apt to be treated as a necessary evil at best, and “disappeared” if they become
troublesome.

E

Purveyor of evil delights, Local seeking to control others with addictions, Offworlder exploiter
of native resources

F

Tourist who’s in too deep, Native seeking a more
meaningful life elsewhere, Offworld entertainer
looking for training here
A deeply repugnant pleasure is offered here by a
culture that sees nothing wrong with it, Certain
pleasures here are dangerously addictive, The
prices here can involve enslavement or death,
The world has been seized and exploited by an
imperial power

C

T

Forbidden drug, A contract for some unspeakable payment, Powerful tech repurposed for
hedonistic ends

P

Breathtaking natural feature, Artful but decadent salon, Grimy den of desperate vice

E
F
C

T
P

Secret police chief, Scapegoating official,
Treacherous native informer
Rebel leader, Offworld agitator, Imprisoned victim, Crime boss
The natives largely believe in the righteousness
of the state, The police state is automated and
its “rulers” can’t shut it off, The leaders foment
a pogrom against “offworlder spies”.
List of police informers, Wealth taken from “enemies of the state”, Dear Leader’s private stash
Military parade, Gulag, Gray concrete housing
block, Surveillance center

Post-Scarcity

Preceptor Archive

The locals have maintained sufficient Mandate-era
tech to be effectively post-scarcity in their economic
structure. Everyone has all the necessities and most
of the desires they can imagine. Conflict now exists
over the apportionment of services and terrestrial
space, since anything else can be had in abundance.
Military goods and items of mass destruction may
still be restricted, and there is probably some reason
that the locals do not export their vast wealth.

The Preceptors of the Great Archive were a pre-Silence organization devoted to ensuring the dissemination of human culture, history, and basic technology to frontier worlds that risked losing this
information during the human expansion. Most
frontier planets had an Archive where natives could
learn useful technical skills in addition to human history and art. Those Archives that managed to survive
the Silence now strive to send their missionaries of
knowledge to new worlds in need of their lore.

E

Frenzied ideologue fighting over an idea, Paranoid local fearing offworlder influence, Grim
reformer seeking the destruction of the “enfeebling” productive tech

F

Offworlder seeking something available only
here, Local struggling to maintain the production tech, Native missionary seeking to bring
abundance to other worlds

C

The tech causes serious side-effects on those
who take advantage of it, The tech is breaking
down, The population is growing too large, The
tech produces only certain things in abundance

T

A cornucopia device, A rare commodity that
cannot be duplicated, Contract for services

T

Lost Archive database, Ancient pretech teaching
equipment, Hidden cache of unacceptable tech

P

Tiny but richly-appointed private quarters, Market for services, Hushed non-duped art salon

P

Archive lecture hall, Experimental laboratory,
Student-local riot

E

Luddite native, Offworld merchant who wants
the natives kept ignorant, Religious zealot, Corrupted First Speaker who wants to keep a monopoly on learning

F

Preceptor Adept missionary, Offworld scholar,
Reluctant student, Roving Preceptor Adept
The local Archive has taken a very religious and
mystical attitude toward their teaching, The Archive has maintained some replicable pretech
science, The Archive has been corrupted and
their teaching is incorrect

C

150• WORLD TAGS
Pretech Cultists

Primitive Aliens

The capacities of human science before the Silence
vastly outmatch the technology available since the
Scream. The Jump Gates alone were capable of crossing hundreds of light years in a moment, and they
were just one example of the results won by blending
psychic artifice with pretech science. Some worlds
outright worship the artifacts of their ancestors, seeing in them the work of more enlightened and perfect
humanity. These cultists may or may not understand
the operation or replication of these devices, but they
seek and guard them jealously.

The world is populated by a large number of sapient
aliens that have yet to develop advanced technology.
The human colonists may have a friendly or hostile
relationship with the aliens, but a certain intrinsic
tension is likely. Small human colonies might have
been enslaved or otherwise subjugated.

E
F
C

Cult leader, Artifact supplier, Pretech smuggler
Offworld scientist, Robbed collector, Cult heretic
The cultists can actually replicate certain forms
of pretech, The cultists abhor use of the devices
as “presumption on the holy”, The cultists mistake the party’s belongings for pretech

T

Pretech artifacts both functional and broken,
Religious-jargon laced pretech replication techniques, Waylaid payment for pretech artifacts

P

Shrine to nonfunctional pretech, Smuggler’s den,
Public procession showing a prized artifact

E
F

Hostile alien chief, Human firebrand, Dangerous local predator, Alien religious zealot
Colonist leader, Peace-faction alien chief, Planetary frontiersman, Xenoresearcher

C

The alien numbers are huge and can overwhelm
the humans whenever they so choose, One
group is trying to use the other to kill their political opponents, The aliens are incomprehensibly
strange, One side commits an atrocity

T

Alien religious icon, Ancient alien-human treaty,
Alien technology
Alien village, Fortified human settlement, Massacre site

P

Prison Planet

Psionics Academy

This planet is or was intended as a prison. Some such
prisons were meant for specific malefactors of the
Terran Mandate, while others were to contain entire “dangerous” ethnic groups or alien races. Some
may still have warden AIs or automatic systems to
prevent any unauthorized person from leaving, and
any authorization permits have long since expired.

This world is one of the few that have managed to
redevelop the basics of psychic training. Without
this education, a potential psychic is doomed to either madness or death unless they refrain from using
their abilities. Psionic academies are rare enough that
offworlders are often sent there to study by wealthy
patrons. The secrets of psychic mentorship, the
protocols and techniques that allow a psychic to
successfully train another, are carefully guarded at
these academies. Most are closely affiliated with the
planetary government.

E

Crazed warden AI, Brutal heir to gang leadership, Offworlder who’s somehow acquired warden powers and exploits the locals

F

Innocent local born here, Native technician
forced to maintain the very tech that imprisons
them, Offworlder trapped here by accident
Departure permits are a precious currency, The
prison industry still makes valuable pretech devices, Gangs have metamorphosed into governments, The local nobility descended from the
prison staff
A pass to get offworld, A key to bypass ancient
security devices, Contraband forbidden by the
security scanners

C

T
P

Mandate-era prison block converted to government building, Industrial facility manned
by mandatory numbers of prisoners, Makeshift
shop where contraband is assembled

E

Corrupt psychic instructor, Renegade student,
Mad psychic researcher, Resentful townie

F

Offworld researcher, Aspiring student, Wealthy
tourist
The academy curriculum kills a significant percentage of students, The faculty use students as
research subjects, The students are indoctrinated as sleeper agents, The local natives hate the
academy, The academy is part of a religion.
Secretly developed psitech, A runaway psychic
mentor, Psychic research prize

C

T
P

Training grounds, Experimental laboratory,
School library, Campus hangout

WORLD TAGS •151
Psionics Fear

Psionics Worship

The locals are terrified of psychics. Perhaps their
history is studded with feral psychics who went on
murderous rampages, or perhaps they simply nurse
an unreasoning terror of those “mutant freaks”. Psychics demonstrate their powers at risk of their lives.

These natives view psionic powers as a visible gift of
god or sign of superiority. If the world has a functional psychic training academy, psychics occupy almost
all major positions of power and are considered the
natural and proper rulers of the world. If the world
lacks training facilities, it is likely a hodgepodge of
demented cults, with each one dedicated to a marginally-coherent feral prophet and their psychopathic
ravings.

E

Mental purity investigator, Suspicious zealot,
Witch-finder

F

Hidden psychic, Offworlder psychic trapped
here, Offworld educator

C

Psychic potential is much more common here,
Some tech is mistaken as psitech, Natives believe
certain rituals and customs can protect them
from psychic powers
Hidden psitech cache, Possessions of convicted
psychics, Reward for turning in a psychic

T
P

E

Psychic inquisitor, Haughty mind-noble, Psychic slaver, Feral prophet

F

Offworlder psychic researcher, Native rebel,
Offworld employer seeking psychics

C

The psychic training is imperfect, and the psychics all show significant mental illness, The
psychics have developed a unique discipline,
The will of a psychic is law, Psychics in the party
are forcibly kidnapped for “enlightening”.

T

Ancient psitech, Valuable psychic research records, Permission for psychic training

P

Psitech-imbued council chamber, Temple to the
mind, Sanitarium-prison for feral psychics

Inquisitorial chamber, Lynching site, Museum
of psychic atrocities

Quarantined World

Radioactive World

The world is under a quarantine, and space travel
to and from it is strictly forbidden. This may be enforced by massive ground batteries that burn any
interlopers from the planet’s sky, or it may be that a
neighboring world runs a persistent blockade.

Whether due to a legacy of atomic warfare unhindered by nuke snuffers or a simple profusion of
radioactive elements, this world glows in the dark.
Even heavy vacc suits can filter only so much of the
radiation, and most natives suffer a wide variety of
cancers, mutations and other illnesses without the
protection of advanced medical treatments.

E
F
C

Defense installation commander, Suspicious patrol leader, Crazed asteroid hermit
Relative of a person trapped on the world, Humanitarian relief official, Treasure hunter
The natives want to remain isolated, The quarantine is enforced by an ancient alien installation, The world is rife with maltech abominations, The blockade is meant to starve everyone
on the barren world.

T

Defense grid key, Bribe for getting someone out,
Abandoned alien tech

P

Bridge of a blockading ship, Defense installation
control room, Refugee camp

E

Bitter mutant, Relic warlord, Desperate wouldbe escapee

F

Reckless prospector, Offworld scavenger, Biogenetic variety seeker

C

The radioactivity is steadily growing worse, The
planet’s medical resources break down, The
radioactivity has inexplicable effects on living
creatures, The radioactivity is the product of a
malfunctioning pretech manufactory.
Ancient atomic weaponry, Pretech anti-radioactivity drugs, Untainted water supply

T
P

Mutant-infested ruins, Scorched glass plain,
Wilderness of bizarre native life, Glowing barrens

152• WORLD TAGS
Refugees

Regional Hegemon

The world teems with refugees, either exiles from another planet who managed to get here, or the human
detritus of some local conflict that have fled to the
remaining stable states. The natives usually regard
the refugees with hostility, an attitude returned by
many among their unwilling guests.

This world has the technological sophistication, natural resources, and determined polity necessary to be
a regional hegemon for the sector. Nearby worlds are
likely either directly subservient to it or tack carefully
to avoid its anger. It may even be the capital of a small
stellar empire.

E

Xenophobic native leader, Refugee chief aspiring to seize the host nation, Politician seeking to
use the refugees as a weapon

E

F

Sympathetic refugee waif, Local hard-pressed by
refugee gangs, Clergy seeking peace
The xenophobes are right that the refugees are
taking over, The refugees are right that the xenophobes want them out or dead, Both are right,
Outside powers are using the refugees to destabilize an enemy government, Refugee and local
cultures are extremely incompatible
Treasures brought out by fleeing refugees, Citizenship papers, Cache of vital refugee supplies,
Hidden arms for terrorists

C

T
P

F
C

T
P

Ambitious general, Colonial official, Contemptuous noble
Diplomat, Offworld ambassador, Foreign spy
The hegemon’s influence is all that’s keeping a
murderous war from breaking out on nearby
worlds, The hegemon is decaying and losing its
control, The government is riddled with spies,
The hegemon is genuinely benign
Diplomatic carte blanche, Deed to an offworld
estate, Foreign aid grant
Palace or seat of government, Salon teeming
with spies, Protest rally, Military base

Hopeless refugee camp, City swarming with
confused strangers, Festival full of angry locals

Restrictive Laws

Revanchists

A myriad of laws, customs, and rules constrain the
inhabitants of this world, and even acts that are completely permissible elsewhere are punished severely
here. The locals may provide lists of these laws to
offworlders, but few non-natives can hope to master
all the important intricacies.

The locals formerly owned another world, or a major nation on the planet formerly owned an additional region of land. Something happened to take
away this control or drive out the former rulers, and
they’ve never forgotten it. The locals are obsessed
with reclaiming their lost lands, and will allow no
questions of practicality to interfere with their cause.

E

Law enforcement officer, Outraged native, Native lawyer specializing in peeling offworlders,
Paid snitch

F

Frustrated offworlder, Repressed native, Reforming crusader

C

The laws change regularly in patterns only natives understand, The laws forbid some action
vital to the party, The laws forbid the simple
existence of some party members, The laws are
secret to offworlders

T

Complete legal codex, Writ of diplomatic immunity, Fine collection vault contents
Courtroom, Mob scene of outraged locals, Legislative chamber, Police station

P

E

Demagogue whipping the locals on to a hopeless war, Politician seeking to use the resentment
for their own ends, Local convinced the PCs are
agents of the “thieving” power, Refugee from
the land bitterly demanding it be reclaimed

F

Realist local clergy seeking peace, Politician
trying to calm the public, Third-party diplomat
trying to stamp out the fire

C

The revanchists’ claim is completely just and reasonable, The land is now occupied entirely by
heirs of the conquerors, Both sides have seized
lands the other thinks are theirs

T

Stock of vital resource produced by the taken
land, Relic carried out of it, Proof that the land
claim is justified or unjustified

P

Memorial monument to the loss, Cemetery of
those who died in the conquest, Public ceremony commemorating the disaster

WORLD TAGS •153
Revolutionaries

Rigid Culture

The world is convulsed by one or more bands of revolutionaries, with some nations perhaps in the grip of
a current revolution. Most of these upheavals can be
expected only to change the general flavor of problems in the polity, but the process of getting there
usually produces a tremendous amount of suffering.

The local culture is extremely rigid. Certain forms of
behavior and belief are absolutely mandated, and any
deviation from these principles is punished, or else
society may be strongly stratified by birth with limited prospects for change. Anything which threatens
the existing social order is feared and shunned.

E

Blood-drenched revolutionary leader, Blooddrenched secret police chief, Hostile foreign
agent seeking further turmoil

E

Rigid reactionary, Wary ruler, Regime ideologue, Offended potentate

F

Sympathetic victim accused of revolutionary
sympathies or government collaboration, Revolutionary or state agent who now repents, Agent
of a neutral power that wants peace

F

C

The revolutionaries actually do seem likely to
put in better rulers, The revolutionaries are
client groups that got out of hand, The revolutionaries are clearly much worse than the government, The revolutionaries have no real ideals
beyond power and merely pretend to ideology
List of secret revolutionary sympathizers, Proof
of rebel hypocrisy, Confiscated wealth

Revolutionary agitator, Ambitious peasant,
Frustrated merchant
The cultural patterns are enforced by technological aids, The culture is run by a secret cabal of
manipulators, The culture has explicit religious
sanction, The culture evolved due to important
necessities that have since been forgotten
Precious traditional regalia, Peasant tribute, Opulent treasures of the ruling class

T
P

C

T
P

Time-worn palace, Low-caste slums, Bandit den,
Reformist temple

Festival that explodes into violence, Heavily-fortified police station, Revolutionary base
hidden in the wilderness

Rising Hegemon

Ritual Combat

This world is not yet a dominant power in the sector, but it’s well on its way there. Whether through
newly-blossoming economic, military, or cultural
power, they’re extending their influence over their
neighbors and forging new arrangements between
their government and the rulers of nearby worlds.

The locals favor some form of stylized combat to
resolve disputes, provide entertainment, or settle
religious differences. This combat is probably not
normally lethal unless it’s reserved for a specific disposable class of slaves or professionals. Some combat
may involve mastery of esoteric weapons and complex arenas, while other forms might require nothing
more than a declaration in the street and a drawn gun.

E
F
C

T
P

Jingoistic supremacist, Official bent on glorious
success, Foreign agent saboteur
Friendly emissary to the benighted, Hardscrabble local turned great success, Foreign visitor
seeking contacts or knowledge
They’re only strong because their neighbors
have been weakened, Their success is based on
a fluke resource or pretech find, They bitterly
resent their neighbors as former oppressors
Tribute shipment, Factory or barracks emblematic of their power source, Tech or data that will
deal a blow to their rise
Rustic town being hurled into prosperity, Government building being expanded, Starport
struggling under the flow of new ships

E

Bloodthirsty local champion, Ambitious gladiator stable owner, Xenophobic master fighter

F

Peace-minded foreign missionary, Temperate
defender of the weak, Local eager to learn of
offworld fighting styles
The required weapons are strange pretech artifacts, Certain classes are forbidden from fighting
and require champions, Loss doesn’t mean death
but it does mean ritual scarring or property loss

C

T

Magnificent weapon, Secret book of martial
techniques, Token signifying immunity to ritual
combat challenges, Prize won in bloody battle

P

Area full of cheering spectators, Dusty street
outside a saloon, Memorial for fallen warriors

154• WORLD TAGS

Robots

Seagoing Cities

The world has a great many robots on it. Most bots
are going to be non-sentient expert systems, though
an AI with enough computing resources can control many bots at once, and some worlds may have
developed VIs to a degree that individual bots can
seem (or be) sentient. Some worlds might even be
ruled by metal overlords, ones which do not need to
be sentient so long as they have overwhelming force.

Either the world is entirely water or else the land is
simply too dangerous for most humans. Human settlement on this world consists of a number of floating cities that follow the currents and the fish. These
city-ships might have been purpose-built for their
task, or they could be jury-rigged conglomerations
of ships and structures thrown together when the
need for seagoing life become apparent to the locals.

E

Hostile robot master, Robot greedy to seize offworld tech, Robot fallen in love with the PC’s
ship, Oligarch whose factories build robots

E

F

Data-seeking robot, Plucky young robot tech,
Local being pushed out of a job by robots

C

The robots are only partially controlled, The
robots are salvaged and originally meant for
a much darker use, The robots require a rare
material that the locals fight over, The robots
require the planet’s specific infrastructure so
cannot be exported

T

Prototype robot, Secret robot override codes,
Vast cache of robot-made goods, Robot-destroying pretech weapon

P

Humming robotic factory, Stark robotic “barracks”, House crowded with robot servants and
only one human owner

F

Pirate city lord, Mer-human raider chieftain,
Hostile landsman noble, Enemy city saboteur
City navigator, Scout captain, Curious mer-human, Hard-pressed ship-city engineer

C

The seas are not water, The fish schools have
vanished and the city faces starvation, Terrible
storms drive the city into the glacial regions,
Suicide ships ram the city’s hull

T

Giant pearls with mysterious chemical properties, Buried treasure, Vital repair materials

P

Bridge of the city, Storm-tossed sea, A bridge
fashioned of many small boats.

WORLD TAGS •155
Sealed Menace

Secret Masters

Something on this planet has the potential to create
enormous havoc for the inhabitants if it is not kept
safely contained by its keepers. Whether a massive
seismic fault line suppressed by pretech terraforming
technology, a disease that has to be quarantined within hours of discovery, or an ancient alien relic that
requires regular upkeep in order to prevent planetary
catastrophe, the menace is a constant shadow on the
fearful populace.

The world is actually run by a hidden cabal, acting
through their catspaws in the visible government.
For one reason or another, this group finds it imperative that they not be identified by outsiders, and
in some cases even the planet’s own government may
not realize that they’re actually being manipulated by
hidden masters.
E

E

Hostile outsider bent on freeing the menace,
Misguided fool who thinks he can use it, Reckless researcher who thinks he can fix it

An agent of the cabal, Government official who
wants no questions asked, Willfully blinded local

F

F

Keeper of the menace, Student of its nature, Victim of the menace

Paranoid conspiracy theorist, Machiavellian
gamesman within the cabal, Interstellar investigator

C

C

The menace would bring great wealth along
with destruction, The menace is intelligent, The
natives don’t all believe in the menace
A key to unlock the menace, A precious byproduct of the menace, The secret of the menace’s
true nature
Guarded fortress containing the menace, Monitoring station, Scene of a prior outbreak of the
menace

The secret masters have a benign reason
for wanting secrecy, The cabal fights openly amongst itself, The cabal is recruiting new
members
A dossier of secrets on a government official, A
briefcase of unmarked credit notes, The identity
of a cabal member

T
P

T
P

Smoke-filled room, Shadowy alleyway, Secret
underground bunker

Sectarians

Seismic Instability

The world is torn by violent disagreement between
sectarians of a particular faith. Each views the other
as a damnable heresy in need of extirpation. Local
government may be able to keep open war from
breaking out, but the poisonous hatred divides communities. The nature of the faith may be religious, or
it may be based on some secular ideology.

The local land masses are remarkably unstable, and
regular earthquakes rack the surface. Local construction is either advanced enough to sway and move
with the vibrations or primitive enough that it is
easily rebuilt. Severe volcanic activity may be part
of the instability.

E

Paranoid believer, Native convinced the party
is working for the other side, Absolutist ruler

F

Reformist clergy, Local peacekeeping official,
Offworld missionary, Exhausted ruler
The conflict has more than two sides, The sectarians hate each other for multiple reasons, The
sectarians must cooperate or else life on this
world is imperiled, The sectarians hate outsiders
more than they hate each other, The differences
in sects are incomprehensible to an outsider

C

T

Ancient holy book, Incontrovertible proof, Offering to a local holy man

P

Sectarian battlefield, Crusading temple, Philosopher’s salon, Bitterly divided village

E
F
C

T
P

Earthquake cultist, Hermit seismologist, Burrowing native life form, Earthquake-inducing
saboteur
Experimental construction firm owner, Adventurous volcanologist, Geothermal prospector
The earthquakes are caused by malfunctioning
pretech terraformers, They’re caused by alien
technology, They’re restrained by alien technology that is being plundered by offworlders,
The earthquakes are used to generate enormous
amounts of energy.
Earthquake generator, Earthquake suppressor,
Mineral formed at the core of the world, Earthquake-proof building schematics
Volcanic caldera, Village during an earthquake,
Mud slide, Earthquake opening superheated
steam fissures

156• WORLD TAGS
Shackled World

Societal Despair

This world is being systematically contained by an
outside power. Some ancient autonomous defense
grid, robot law enforcement, alien artifact, or other
force is preventing the locals from developing certain
technology, or using certain devices, or perhaps from
developing interstellar flight. This limit may or may
not apply to offworlders; in the former case, the PCs
may have to figure out a way to beat the shackles
simply to escape the world.

The world’s dominant society has lost faith in itself.
Whether through some all-consuming war, great
catastrophe, overwhelming outside culture, or religious collapse, the natives no longer believe in their
old values, and search desperately for something new.
Fierce conflict often exists between the last believers
in the old dispensation and the nihilistic or searching
disciples of the new age.

E
F

Passionless jailer-AI, Paranoid military grid AI,
Robot overlord, Enigmatic alien master
Struggling local researcher, Offworlder trapped
here, Scientist with a plan to break the chains

C

The shackles come off for certain brief windows
of time, The locals think the shackles are imposed by God, An outside power greatly profits
from the shackles, The rulers are exempt from
the shackles

T

Keycode to bypass the shackle, Tech shielded
from the shackle, Exportable version of the
shackle that can affect other worlds

P

Grim high-tech control center, Factory full of
workaround tech, Temple to the power or entity
that imposed the shackle

E

Zealot who blames outsiders for the decay, Nihilistic warlord, Offworlder looking to exploit
the local despair

F

Struggling messenger of a new way, Valiant paragon of a fading tradition, Local going through
the motions of serving a now-irrelevant role

C

A massive war discredited all the old values, Outside powers are working to erode societal confidence for their own benefit, A local power is
profiting greatly from the despair, The old ways
were meant to aid survival on this world and
their passing is causing many new woes
Relic that would inspire a renaissance, Art that
would inspire new ideas, Priceless artifact of a
now-scorned belief
Empty temple, Crowded den of obliviating vice,
Smoky hall full of frantic speakers

T
P

Sole Supplier

Taboo Treasure

Some extremely important resource is exported from
this world and this world alone. It’s unlikely that the
substance is critical for building spike drives unless
this world is also the first to begin interstellar flight,
but it may be critical to other high-tech processes or
devices. The locals make a large amount of money off
this trade and control of it is of critical importance to
the planet’s rulers, and potentially to outside powers.

The natives here produce something that is both
fabulously valuable and strictly forbidden elsewhere
in the sector. It may be a lethally addictive drug, forbidden gengineering tech, vat-grown “perfect slaves”,
or a useful substance that can only be made through
excruciating human suffering. This treasure is freely traded on the world, but bringing it elsewhere is
usually an invitation to a long prison stay or worse.

E

Resource oligarch, Ruthless smuggler, Resource-controlling warlord, Foreign agent seeking to subvert local government
Doughty resource miner, Researcher trying to
synthesize the stuff, Small-scale resource producer, Harried starport trade overseer

E

The substance is slow poison to process, The
substance is created by hostile alien natives,
The substance is very easy to smuggle in usable
amounts, Only the natives have the genes or
tech to extract it effectively

C

The treasure is extremely hard to smuggle, Its
use visibly marks a user, The natives consider it
for their personal use only,

T

T

Cache of processed resource, Trade permit to
buy a load of it, A shipment of nigh-undetectably fake substance

P

P

Bustling resource extraction site, Opulent palace
built with resource money, Lazy town square
where everyone lives on resource payments

Load of the forbidden good, Smuggling tech that
could hide the good perfectly, Blackmail data on
offworld buyers of the good
Den where the good is used, Market selling the
good to locals and a few outsiders, Factory or
processing area where the good is created

F
C

Maker of a vile commodity, Smuggler for a powerful offworlder, Depraved offworlder here for
“fun”, Local warlord who controls the treasure
F Reformer seeking to end its use, Innovator trying to repurpose the treasure in innocent ways,
Wretched addict unwillingly prey to the treasure

WORLD TAGS •157
Terraform Failure

Theocracy

This world was marginal for human habitation when
it was discovered, but the Mandate or the early government put in pretech terraforming engines to correct its more extreme qualities. The terraforming did
not entirely work, either failing of its own or suffering the destruction of the engines during the Silence.
The natives are only partly adapted to the world’s
current state, and struggle with the environment.

The planet is ruled by the priesthood of the predominant religion or ideology. The rest of the locals may
or may not be terribly pious, but the clergy have the
necessary military strength, popular support or control of resources to maintain their rule. Alternative
faiths or incompatible ideologies are likely to be both
illegal and socially unacceptable.

E
F
C

T
P

Brutal ruler who cares only for their people,
Offworlder trying to loot the damaged engines,
Warlord trying to seize limited habitable land
Local trying to fix the engines, Offworlder student of the engines, World-wise native survivor
The engines produced too much of something
instead of too little, The engines were hijacked
by aliens with different preferences, It was discovered that an Earth-like environment would
eventually cause a catastrophic disaster
Parts to repair or restore the engines, Lootable
pretech fragments, Valuable local tech devised
to cope with the world

E

Decadent priest-ruler, Zealous inquisitor, Relentless proselytizer, True Believer

F

Heretic, Offworld theologian, Atheistic merchant, Desperate commoner

C

The theocracy actually works well, The theocracy is decadent and hated by the common folk,
The theocracy is divided into mutually hostile
sects, The theocracy is led by aliens

T

Precious holy text, Martyr’s bones, Secret church
records, Ancient church treasures
Glorious temple, Austere monastery, Academy
for ideological indoctrination, Decadent pleasure-cathedral

P

Zone of tolerable gravity or temperature, Native
settlement built to cope with the environment,
Massive ruined terraforming engine

Tomb World

Trade Hub

Tomb worlds are planets that were once inhabited
by humans before the Silence. The sudden collapse
of the jump gate network and the inability to bring
in the massive food supplies required by the planet
resulted in starvation, warfare, and death. Most tomb
worlds are naturally hostile to human habitation and
could not raise sufficient crops to maintain life. The
few hydroponic facilities were usually destroyed in
the fighting, and all that is left now are ruins, bones,
and silence.

This world is a major crossroads for local interstellar
trade. It is well-positioned at the nexus of several
short-drill trade routes, and has facilities for easy
transfer of valuable cargoes and the fueling and repairing of starships. The natives are accustomed to
outsiders, and a polyglot mass of people from every
nearby world can be found trading here.

E
F
C

T
P

Demented survivor tribe chieftain, Avaricious
scavenger, Automated defense system, Native
predator
Scavenger Fleet captain, Archaeologist, Salvaging historian, Xenophilic native survivor
The ruins are full of booby-traps left by the final
inhabitants, The world’s atmosphere quickly degrades anything in an opened building, A handful of desperate natives survived the Silence, The
structures are unstable and collapsing
Lost pretech equipment, Tech caches, Stores of
unused munitions, Ancient historical data
Crumbling hive-city, City square carpeted in
bones, Ruined hydroponic facility, Cannibal
tribe’s lair, Dead orbital jump gate

E

Cheating merchant, Thieving dockworker,
Commercial spy, Corrupt customs official

F

Rich tourist, Hardscrabble free trader, Merchant
prince in need of catspaws, Friendly spaceport
urchin

C

An outworlder faction schemes to seize the trade
hub, Saboteurs seek to blow up a rival’s warehouses, Enemies are blockading the trade routes,
Pirates lace the hub with spies

T

Voucher for a warehouse’s contents, Insider
trading information, Case of precious offworld
pharmaceuticals, Box of legitimate tax stamps
indicating customs dues have been paid.

P

Raucous bazaar, Elegant restaurant, Spaceport
teeming with activity, Foggy street lined with
warehouses

158• WORLD TAGS
Tyranny

Unbraked AI

The local government is brutal and indifferent to the
will of the people. Laws may or may not exist, but
the only one that matters is the whim of the rulers
on any given day. Their minions swagger through
the streets while the common folk live in terror of
their appetites. The only people who stay wealthy are
friends and servants of the ruling class.

Artificial intelligences are costly and difficult to create, requiring a careful sequence of “growth stages”
in order to bring them to sentience before artificial
limits on cognition speed and learning development
are installed. These “brakes” prevent runaway cognition metastasis. This world has an “unbraked AI” on
it, probably with a witting or unwitting corps of servants. Unbraked AIs are quite insane, but they learn
and reason with a speed impossible for humans, and
can demonstrate a truly distressing subtlety.

E

Debauched autocrat, Sneering bully-boy, Soulless government official, Occupying army officer

F

Conspiring rebel, Oppressed merchant, Desperate peasant, Inspiring religious leader

C

The tyrant rules with vastly superior technology,
The tyrant is a figurehead for a cabal of powerful
men and women, The people are resigned to
their suffering, The tyrant is hostile to “meddlesome outworlders”.
Plundered wealth, Beautiful toys of the elite, Regalia of rulership

T
P

Impoverished village, Protest rally massacre,
Decadent palace, Religious hospital for the indigent

E
F
C

T
P

AI Cultist, Maltech researcher, Government official dependent on the AI
Perimeter agent, AI researcher, Braked AI
The AI’s presence is unknown to the locals, The
locals depend on the AI for some vital service,
The AI appears to be harmless, The AI has fixated on the group’s ship’s computer, The AI wants
transport offworld
The room-sized AI core itself, Maltech research
files, Perfectly tabulated blackmail on government officials, Pretech computer circuitry
Municipal computing banks, Cult compound,
Repair center, Ancient hardcopy library

Urbanized Surface

Utopia

The world’s land area is covered with buildings that
extend downward for multiple levels. Such worlds
either have a population in the trillions, extremely
little land area, or are largely-abandoned due to some
past catastrophe. Agriculture and resource extraction
are part of the urban complex, and there may be an
advanced maintenance system that may not be entirely under the control of present natives.

Natural and social conditions on this world have
made it a paradise for its inhabitants, a genuine utopia of happiness and fulfillment. This is normally
the result of drastic human engineering, including
brain-gelding, neurochemical control, personality
curbs, or complete “humanity” redefinitions. Even so,
the natives are extremely happy with their lot, and
may wish to extend that joy to poor, sad outsiders.

E

E

F
C

Maintenance AI that hates outsiders, Tyrant of
a habitation block, Deep-dwelling prophet who
considers “the sky” a blasphemy to be quelled
Local yearning for wild spaces, Grubby urchin
of the underlevels, Harried engineer trying to
maintain ancient works, Grizzled hab cop
The urban blocks are needed to survive the environment, The blocks were part of an ancient
device of world-spanning size, The blocks require constant maintenance to avoid dangerous
types of decay

F
C

T

Massively efficient power source, Map of the
secret ways of a zone, Passkey into restricted
hab block areas

T

P

Giant hab block now devoid of inhabitants,
Chemical-reeking underway, Seawater mine
full of salt and massive flowing channels

P

Compassionate neurotherapist, Proselytizing
native missionary to outsiders, Brutal tyrant
who rules through inexorable happiness
Deranged malcontent, Bloody-handed guerrilla
leader of a rebellion of madmen, Outsider trying
to find a way to reverse the utopian changes
The natives really are deeply and contentedly
happy with their altered lot, The utopia produces something that attracts others, The utopia
works on converting outsiders through persuasion and generosity, The utopia involves some
sacrifice that’s horrifying to non-members
Portable device that applies the utopian change,
Plans for a device that would destroy the utopia,
Goods created joyfully by the locals
Plaza full of altered humans, Social ritual site,
Secret office where “normal” humans rule

WORLD TAGS •159
Warlords

Xenophiles

The world is plagued by warlords. Numerous powerful men and women control private armies sufficiently strong to cow whatever local government
may exist. On the lands they claim, their word is law.
Most spend their time oppressing their own subjects
and murderously pillaging those of their neighbors.
Most like to wrap themselves in the mantle of ideology, religious fervor, or an ostensibly legitimate
right to rule.

The natives of this world are fast friends with a particular alien race. The aliens may have saved the planet at some point in the past, or awed the locals with
superior tech or impressive cultural qualities. The
aliens might even be the ruling class on the planet.

E

Warlord, Avaricious lieutenant, Expensive assassin, Aspiring minion

F

Vengeful commoner, Government military officer, Humanitarian aid official, Village priest

C

The warlords are willing to cooperate to fight
mutual threats, The warlords favor specific religions or races over others, The warlords are
using substantially more sophisticated tech than
others, Some of the warlords are better rulers
than the government

T

Weapons cache, Buried plunder, A warlord’s
personal battle harness, Captured merchant
shipping

P

Gory battlefield, Burnt-out village, Barbaric
warlord palace, Squalid refugee camp

E
F
C

Offworld xenophobe, Suspicious alien leader,
Xenocultural imperialist
Benevolent alien, Native malcontent, Gone-native offworlder
The enthusiasm is due to alien psionics or tech,
The enthusiasm is based on a lie, The aliens
strongly dislike their “groupies”, The aliens feel
obliged to rule humanity for its own good, Humans badly misunderstand the aliens

T

Hybrid alien-human tech, Exotic alien crafts,
Sophisticated xenolinguistic and xenocultural
research data

P

Alien district, Alien-influenced human home,
Cultural festival celebrating alien artist

Xenophobes

Zombies

The natives are intensely averse to dealings with outworlders. Whether through cultural revulsion, fear
of tech contamination, or a genuine immunodeficiency, the locals shun foreigners from offworld and
refuse to have anything to do with them beyond the
bare necessities of contact. Trade may or may not
exist on this world, but if it does, it is almost certainly
conducted by a caste of untouchables and outcasts.

This menace may not take the form of shambling
corpses, but some disease, alien artifact, or crazed
local practice produces men and women with habits similar to those of murderous cannibal undead.
These outbreaks may be regular elements in local society, either provoked by some malevolent creators
or the consequence of some local condition.

E

Revulsed local ruler, Native convinced some
wrong was done to him, Cynical demagogue

F

Curious native, Exiled former ruler, Local desperately seeking outworlder help

C

The natives are symptomless carriers of a contagious and dangerous disease, The natives are
exceptionally vulnerable to offworld diseases,
The natives require elaborate purification rituals after speaking to an offworlder or touching
them, The local ruler has forbidden any mercantile dealings with outworlders
Jealously-guarded precious relic, Local product
under export ban, Esoteric local technology
Sealed treaty port, Public ritual not open to outsiders, Outcaste slum home

T
P

E
F

Soulless maltech biotechnology cult, Sinister
governmental agent, Crazed zombie cultist
Survivor of an outbreak, Doctor searching for a
cure, Rebel against the secret malefactors

C

The zombies retain human intelligence, The
zombies can be cured, The process is voluntary
among devotees, The condition is infectious

T

Cure for the condition, Alien artifact that causes
it, Details of the cult’s conversion process

P

House with boarded-up windows, Dead city,
Fortified bunker that was overrun from within

160• ATMOSPHERE

ATMOSPHERE
The first step in randomized world generation is determining the planet’s atmosphere. In some cases, this is
going to be preordained; if you want a barren asteroid
base, it’s not going to have any atmosphere at all. If you
want a world teeming with human life, on the other
hand, it almost certainly is going to have a breathable
atmosphere.
Note that if a truly noxious atmosphere, climate,
or biosphere turns up on a random roll, you should
think carefully about what has made humans choose
to live on such a world. Perhaps the original colonists
were prisoners exiled to an open-world prison. It could
be their ancestors sought isolation at all costs. Given its
position in the sector, it might be a vital refueling and
trading port for multiple short-run spike drive courses. The original colonists might have had to make an
emergency landing. Whatever the reason, it takes a
powerful motivation to make a band of colonists decide to make a corrosive, burning hellhole of a planet
their permanent home.

Types of Atmospheres

Corrosive atmospheres are dangerously hostile to conventional vacc suits and other protective gear. They
steadily strip away at a suit’s vent ports, wiring connections, and other weak spots until they eventually break
through and flood the suit with a toxic cocktail that
usually kills a victim in seconds. Weak atmospheres
might require as much as a day to degrade a vacc suit,
while strong ones might accomplish the job in an hour.
Even forcefield-based environment suits such as a FEP
suffer steady damage to their exposed elements.
Native vacc suits are usually covered with an
ablative layer or spray that can be regularly renewed,
and their buildings often rely on a steadily-extruded
slurry of neutralizing materials that can be constantly
renewed by pores in the building surface itself. This
often gives the building a drippy, half-melted look that
may be more than cosmetic in the case of those structures that have failing slurry pumps. Advanced tech
level 5 equipment may be able to overcome the effects,
but even pretech is often taxed by the relentless rigors
of this world. Vehicles and shuttles are kept in pressurized garages when not in use, and starships never
land for long.
Corrosive worlds have a number of intrinsic adventure complications, the largest being the way that
every activity outside of a hab building comes with a
built-in time limit. Whatever the party chooses to do
outside of a building, it has to accomplish before their
suit seals fail or the atmosphere corrodes a hole in their
vehicle hull. A clever GM can use this problem to add
extra tension to an otherwise simple task.
Inert gas atmospheres aren’t hostile or poisonous,
but they’re unbreathable by humans. If the planet’s cli-

2d6
2

Type
Corrosive, damaging to foreign objects

3

Inert gas, useless for respiration

4

Airless or thin to the point of suffocation

5-9

Breathable mix

10

Thick, but breathable with a pressure mask

11

Invasive, penetrating suit seals

12

Both corrosive and invasive in its effects

mate is otherwise tolerable, the natives might be able
to live and work outdoors without anything more than
an air tank and face mask. Some degree of technical
sophistication is going to be necessary for humanity
to survive, and large supplies of oxygen are going to
have to be extracted from some local source. “Air mines”
might exist to replace the oxygen lost during human
use, or local power plants might need to be kept running full blast in order to crack water molecules into
hydrogen and oxygen.
On worlds with an unbreathable atmosphere, control of the air supply makes it much harder for locals
to rebel against their leaders. Without the equipment
and power to generate their own air supplies, would-be
rebels are entirely at the mercy of those who control
the oxygen. Most rulers pick up on this fact rapidly, and
some worlds with unbreathable atmospheres might
even make it a crime to own illicit oxygen generation
equipment.
Airless or thin atmospheres are appropriate to asteroids, rocky planetoids, or barren worlds that have
had their atmospheres burnt off by weapons or cosmic caprice. Whatever atmosphere exists is too thin
to support human life, if it exists at all, and the world
is largely naked to the chill of space and the blaze of
stellar heat. Exposure to the planet’s surface without a
vacc suit or pressurized building is as lethal as exposure
to hard vacuum.
Airless worlds are hostile to human life, but they
excel at preserving the relics of the past. Provided that
the ruins or remains are kept out of the baking heat of
the local stellar body and the impact of random meteorites, they can survive for millions of years. Some
exceptionally ancient alien ruins might even date back
from before the world lost its atmosphere.
Breathable mix atmospheres can support human
life without additional equipment or gengineered modification. Any world that has a human population in
the millions or more almost certainly has a breathable
mix atmosphere.
While the air is breathable, almost every world
has its own subtle cocktail of inert gases, atmospheric contaminants, and other odoriferous ingredients.
For spacers accustomed to the filtered air supply of a

ATMOSPHERE •161
starship, the “new world stink” of a fresh planetfall can
be maddening, as few linger long enough to get used
to the smell of the local air. Attempting to explain the
source of this discomfort to the locals rarely results in
positive results. Some spaceport bars make a point of
their air filtration and composition mixers.
Thick atmospheres can usually be breathed with the
aid of a filter mask, though the mix of contaminants
renders it slowly or quickly toxic to humans who attempt to breathe it straight. Separate air supplies are
not necessary to supplement the blend, but any society that means to survive on such a world must have
sufficient technological expertise to manufacture and
maintain large numbers of filter masks.
Thick atmospheres are often at least semi-opaque,
and some worlds have thick atmospheres that are completely impenetrable to ordinary light. Deep banks of
permanent fog might shroud the planet, or natives
might have to go about with sophisticated ultraviolet
or infrared viewing equipment if they don’t wish to be
blind. Some banks of gases might be impenetrable to
even these viewing tools, leaving a party vulnerable
to moments of complete blindness while out on the
surface of the world.
Invasive toxic atmospheres are composed of a
substantial proportion of molecules small enough to
infiltrate past the seals of most vacc suits. This infiltration doesn’t harm the suit, but the molecules have to
be steadily flushed by the system’s purification sensors
before they build up to a debilitating level. This causes a much faster bleed of air as breathable oxygen is
jettisoned along with the infiltrating molecules. Most

invasive atmospheres cut oxygen supply durations by
half, at best.
Invasive atmospheres make oxygen an even more
important resource than it is on inert gas worlds. Outdoor work is avoided whenever possible, as any failure
of a suit’s toxin sensors or flush system can lead to death
before the wearer even realizes something is wrong.
Steady exposure to low levels of the toxins can also
result in unfortunate effects even with a fully-functional suit. Hallucinations, chronic sickness, or worse
can follow.
Corrosive and invasive atmospheres exist at the
very border of what human society can tolerate. Combining all the worst traits of an eroding, corrosive atmosphere and the invasive intrusion of toxic molecules,
a planet cursed with an atmosphere like this is far more
hostile than any mere airless rock.
Advanced pretech filtering and oxygen generation
equipment might be able to maintain tolerable pressurized habitats and hydroponic systems uncontaminated
by exterior atmosphere. Anything less than this tech
level means greater and greater amounts of societal
resources devoted simply to the effort of breathing.
Entire civilizations can be oriented around overcoming the difficulties of maintaining their structures and
their pressurized homes.
Whatever provoked the initial inhabitants to settle
on this world must have been of overwhelming value
or necessity to convince them to consign themselves
and their children to such a place. It is highly unlikely
that enough ship traffic exists to get any but the most
fortunate locals offworld, so the rest are obliged to deal
with their harsh existence as best they can.

162• TEMPERATURE

TEMPERATURE
A world’s average temperature depends in large part
upon its atmosphere. Worlds with an airless or thin
atmosphere are directly exposed to the wild temperature variations produced by stellar radiation and the
cold void of space, and might flip regularly between
unendurable heat and near-absolute zero depending
on planetary rotation and orbit.
If a GM intends this planet to have a large human population they should restrict the possibility of
a frozen or burning world. Anything that is intolerable to a human without a vacc suit means that major
agriculture is unlikely. As it is effectively impossible to
feed entire planets through limited interstellar trade,
every planet needs to support its own population. A
world that can’t grow food outside of hydroponic labs
or underground farms is unlikely to support millions
of people.

Types of Climates

Frozen worlds are those with so weak a stellar primary
or so great a distance that the average temperature is
close to absolute zero. Any atmosphere that once existed has long since frozen into drifts of solidified oxygen
or lakes of liquid helium. Exposure to these drifts is
very dangerous. Vacc suits maintain a tolerable temperature easily because the stellar void is very empty,
and there is little conduction of heat between the suit
and empty space. Dunking a suit into a lake of thermally-conductive superchilled liquid can force the heating
elements into sudden and drastic overload, draining a
power cell in minutes or even seconds.
Cold worlds are uncomfortable, but a human can
survive on them in nothing more than heavy clothing.
The worst of the cold worlds are similar in condition
to Earth’s Antarctic regions, barren wastes of ice and
wind. The more clement ones have brief warmer seasons or equatorial bands that get enough solar radiation
to support substantial agriculture.
On cold worlds, agricultural land is at a premium. The population is unlikely to be willing to limit its
numbers to what hydroponic farms can provide, and
they may lack the technology for wide-scale artificial
production methods. Savage wars may have broken out
over control of fertile growing regions, and populations have perhaps been driven away from the arable
land into the cold zones and a lingering death.
Some worlds retain installations from before the
Silence deep within the frozen wastes, ancient bases
and laboratories that were planted in an age when
good launch sites and orbital windows meant more
than trifles of temperature. These lost sites might be
remembered in legend and story, and some native leaders might still be in possession of the automatic defense
bypass codes handed down by their ancestors.

2d6
2

Type
Frozen, locked in perpetual ice

3

Cold, dominated by glaciers and tundra

4-5

Variable cold with temperate places

6-8

Temperate, Earthlike in its ranges

9-10

Variable warm, with temperate places

11

Warm, tropical and hotter in places

12

Burning, intolerably hot on its surface

Temperate worlds were the most popular colony
sites, and most of the truly populous worlds of the
frontier have a temperate climate. Many temperate
worlds have temperature ranges not unlike that of
Earth, though most are canted a little further toward
cold or heat depending on their angle and proximity
to the local star.
Temperate worlds are the most likely to teem with
native life as well, and to have alien ruins or remains
located somewhere on their surface. Most frontier
worlds never accumulated enough population to put a
serious strain on a temperate world’s arable land, but
this same capaciousness often allows for more complicated social divisions to develop. Natives of other
worlds are often forced to cooperate or die, while those
of a clement temperate world have the luxury of deep
and lasting divisions.
Warm worlds come in two main flavors, depending on the prevalence of water. “Desert worlds” are hot
enough or arid enough to be deprived of most surface
water. Any life on such a planet has to be capable of
extracting water from living prey, air currents or moisture supplies deep underground. Humans can survive
on warm worlds without more than appropriate clothing, but desert-world humans must learn sophisticated
techniques of water prospecting and well-drilling in
order to maintain their agricultural systems. Warfare
often revolves around these water systems.
The other common variety of warm world is one
blessed with an abundance of surface water. These
worlds tend to be covered with plant and animal life,
teeming with thick jungles and vast mats of sargasso on
seas that boil with piscids and other alien life analogs.
These worlds can be quite prosperous for humans if the
native life is edible, but inhabitants are often forced to
deal with large predators and a vigorously ingenious
native ecology of disease.
Variable temperature worlds tend to show a greater
distribution of climates than other worlds, either ranging from cold to temperate levels or temperate to hot
levels. This may be a climate that changes world-wide
when a long, slow orbit brings the planet into proximity with a stellar primary, or it might be a world
that has substantially different climatic zones spread

TEMPERATURE •163
across its surface. The north pole of one world might
be a sun-blasted desert that moderates to a cool, wet
equator, or an icy world might be warmed here and
there by complex channels of geothermally-heated
subsurface rivers. Variable temperature worlds tend
to have savage weather. The mixing of hot and cold
air can send ferocious cyclones and raging hurricanes
across the surface of the world, some large enough to
consume most of a hemisphere.
Burning worlds are too hot for a human to survive
without equipment similar to a vacc suit in effectiveness. Rivulets of molten lead or copper might bleed
from open veins on the hillsides, and many of the same
perils that face an explorer on a frozen world have hotter equivalents on a burning one. Ash drifts, pools of
molten metal, and superheated liquid vents can bring
quick death to an unwary explorer, and the miners who
inhabit such worlds must be forever vigilant against the
perils of their burning home.

Climate and Adventure

Any planet with Burning or Frozen conditions is going to need some kind of sealed habitat for humanity.
Worlds of Cold or Warm temperatures are at least habitable outside of their most extreme zones, though icy
planets might not have much arable land on the outside.
As a consequence, planets with Frozen or Burning
temperatures tend to have the climate as a backdrop
rather than something the PCs regularly need to deal
with. If they’ve landed on such a world’s spaceport, it’s
probably sealed in some subterranean hangar-cavern
or domed over by massive civil engineering. The ice
or flame might be a constant concern of the locals, but
the PCs aren’t going to have to cope with it unless they
have to leave the inhabited regions of the planet.
On Burning worlds, this isn’t going to happen very
often. Any habitat without active climate control is going to be melted or torched by local conditions in short
order. There will be no ruins to explore or remnants to
recover unless they’re somehow fireproof.
The easiest use of a Burning world’s temperature
is as a threat to the locals or the PCs. If something isn’t
fixed, or if something is destroyed, or if some place isn’t
evacuated in time, then things will get intolerably hot.
There’s usually a grace period of increasing temperature to help add urgency to the situation and layer on
potential penalties or dangers as the PCs struggle to
cope with the situation.
Frozen worlds can be equally lethal if a flood of
liquid oxygen threatens to sweep through a habitat or
a cold-brittled vital component breaks down. More
significantly to PCs, however, frozen worlds tend to
be much better about preserving ruins and remains.
The PCs might be forced to deal with the frigid temperatures as they search through an alien structure or
the icy halls of a dead habitat. Such conditions can lead
to strict time limits on an expedition before materials
start to brittle and fail under the relentless chill.

164• BIOSPHERE

BIOSPHERE
Some worlds are highly unlikely to have a biosphere.
An airless rock, a frozen wasteland, or a world of boiling tin all are unlikely to host any sort of life more
sophisticated than microbes, though the universe has
demonstrated the existence of a few exotic creatures
even on seemingly unendurable planets.
The real question of a biosphere is whether or not
it’s edible. Colonists on a world without edible local life
are forced to seed and grow Terran crops, which may
well be outcompeted by native life specifically evolved
for this world. Such colonists might well end up starving amid gardens of alien fruit, unable to digest any of
it. The only benefit of such worlds is the likelihood that
humans are just as poisonous to local life, though many
large predators don’t realize that until after they devour
some luckless colonist.

Types of Biosphere

Biosphere remnants are the wreckage of a ruined ecology. Petrified trees, drifts of preserved bones, forests
of dead plant life; something killed all the life on this
planet in the relatively recent past. It may have been the
exercise of a maltech planet-buster weapon, or a mutant microbe introduced by human colonists, or some
volcanic eruption or asteroid impact that plunged the
world into decades of frozen night.
Any local civilization not sophisticated enough to
escape the planet likely died when it did. Their ruins
and remains might be found throughout the desolate
wastes, along with more clues as to the cause of the
devastation.
Microbial life is often the only thing that exists on
the more inhospitable planets, yet the wide variety of
environments that can accommodate life means that
these little beasts show up in some of the most unlikely places. Some varieties of slime mold have even
managed to evolve on corrosive-atmosphere planets,
forming a mucous-like outer shell against the atmosphere and then feeding and growing off the chemical
byproducts of its erosion.
Microbial life can also be dangerous. While most
alien microbes are unable to infect or harm the radically
different biology of humans, some show enough ingenuity to accomplish even that difficult feat. Rumors of
terrible “space plagues” that leave behind only drifting
ships and garbled warnings remain a steady staple at
spacer bars throughout the known universe.
No native biosphere is occasionally found on even
the most temperate and otherwise habitable worlds.
For one reason or another, life simply never evolved
on these worlds, leaving them a blank slate for the agricultural and ecological efforts of humans. If the world
is otherwise amenable to Terran life, such planets can
be enormously fertile and agriculturally rich.

2d6
2

Type
Remnant biosphere

3

Microbial life forms exist

4-5

No native biosphere

6-8

Human-miscible biosphere

9-10

Immiscible biosphere

11

Hybrid biosphere

12

Engineered biosphere

They can also be disasters waiting to happen. Pretech xenobiologists compiled standardized colonization
packages of plants, animals, and insect life designed to
expand smoothly and evenly to fill the niches of an uninhabited world. Not all colonists implemented these
packages correctly, and some worlds had disasters or
special circumstances that destabilized their efforts.
Some empty worlds are now in a state of constant biological flux as the local ecology strives vainly to find
some sort of equilibrium between the myriad imported
species and their violent struggle.
More subtly, these worlds can be suddenly and
drastically destabilized by the import of some offworld
plant or animal. With no strong native ecology to fight
off interlopers, the wrong beast or bug can lay waste to
whole continents. These planets tend to be extremely
paranoid about importation of foreign life forms.
Human-miscible biospheres are those in which
some substantial portion of the native life is biologically compatible with human nutritional needs. The
local plants and animals may not be tasty or terribly
nourishing, but they can support life without the serious importation of Terran crop seeds and livestock.
Even the friendlier human-miscible biospheres
often lack the wide variety of edibles that evolved on
Earth, and the natives often supplement their stocks
of local foods with limited Terran agriculture. Exotic
foods, spices, and liquors can be worth interstellar importation to feed the hunger for novelty possessed by
the elites on these worlds.
Unfortunately, the fact that humans can eat some
native life means that it is very likely that some native life can eat humans as well. Large predators and
diseases capable of human infection are by no means
uncommon on these worlds, and small colonies can be
hard-pressed to survive them.
Immiscible biospheres are not friendly to humans.
None of the local plants or animals are edible, and anything the colony needs to eat will have to be grown
from Terran stock. Worse, it is common for the pollen
and other microbial life of these worlds to be highly
allergenic to humans, requiring the regular use of tailored antiallergenics to prevent eventual respiratory
failure or exotic immune-system reactions.

BIOSPHERE •165
These worlds are exceptionally susceptible to the
temptation of human gengineering. Despite the persistent drawbacks, genetic flaws, and handicaps that human gengineering usually introduces in a subject, the
desperate need to eat can drive worlds to wholesale
experimentation on their progeny. The resultant altered humans are often able to digest the local food, but
commonly pay for it in shortened life spans, physical
disabilities, or an inability to consume Terran foodstuffs. Sometimes the consequences are worse still.
Immiscible biospheres produce some of the most
exotic plants and animals in human space. Unfettered
by the limits of familiar evolutionary patterns, creatures of bizarre beauty and strange configurations are
found on many of these worlds. Many lack the intelligence to realize that humans are as poisonous to them
as they are to humans.
Hybrid biospheres are a stable intermixing of Terran flora and fauna with local life forms. Most such
worlds have been colonized for centuries before the
Silence, giving the local ecology time to shake out into
a relatively stable configuration of Earth-born organisms and native life. The native biology may or may
not be miscible with human life, but it is unlikely to be
particularly hostile in any case, or else the interloping
life forms would not have been able to get a foothold
on the planet.
Hybrid biospheres often show strange examples
of symbiosis and adaptation, with plants and animals

forming new alliances. Large predators from one world
may find themselves subsisting on herds of herbivorous alien life, while Terran vegetation provides sustenance for large populations of small, furred, insect-like
grazers. Familiar animals may show seemingly bizarre
behavior patterns that have formed in response to local
conditions, perhaps becoming larger or more aggressive, or having been gengineered for compatibility.
Engineered biospheres are among the rarest, as
they require enormous time and effort on the part of
a highly advanced civilization. Whatever life exists on
this planet has been extensively altered by an alien race
or by advanced pretech gengineering methods. Some
such worlds are paradise planets, carefully sculpted by
some fabulously wealthy predecessor to suit their own
tastes. Others are living forges, where foodstuffs and
refined minerals are produced as byproducts from the
basic organic processes of the world’s biosphere.
Such worlds tend to be fragile. Many engineered
worlds are dependent upon regular stabilizing work to
prevent genetic drift and adaptations that do not serve
the creator’s purpose. Without regular pruning and
adjustment, engineered biospheres can go badly awry.
Some end up leaving nothing but genetic wreckage
in their wake, while others go wrong in more subtle
ways. Where once the biosphere existed to serve the
inhabitants, a creaking engineered biosphere can leave
the planet’s population chained to constant repair and
maintenance efforts just to prevent a planetary collapse.

166• POPULATION

POPULATION
Planetary populations hinge on a world’s habitability. Worlds incapable of growing food on the planet’s
surface are unlikely to have more than a few hundred
thousand inhabitants at best, and truly inimical worlds
might be lucky to have a tenth as many. As a rule of
thumb, a world ought to have some kind of human
habitation on it unless the GM has a specific purpose
for it in mind. A world untouched by human presence
can be interesting in many ways, but without elaboration there’s little to distinguish it from the next airless
ball of rock.
Humans breed quickly, and will tend to push up
against the limits of a world’s capacity to feed and support them. Some cultures with sufficient tech might
rely on contraceptives and birth licensing to ensure
sufficient food for its population, while others might
choose or be forced to leave matters to simple Malthusian culling. Wars and diseases may also serve as
a check on population, or in some cases, cultures may
find themselves so wealthy, self-absorbed and comfortable as to voluntarily choose not to reproduce.

Population Sizes

Failed colonies are occasionally found dotting the worlds
of human space. Some date back to the First Wave of
human colonization more than a thousand years ago,
while others are more recent efforts that guttered out
under the strains of a colony’s birth.
Pirate attacks might have wiped out a young colony, as might a hostile biosphere, alien attack, internal
dissension, disease outbreaks, failure of vital colonial
equipment, or any one of a hundred other disasters.
The ruins of the colony might still have valuable pretech artifacts, however, or colonization deeds authorized by neighboring worlds. A few survivors might
even have clung to life in the intervening centuries,
maintaining some sort of society in the wreckage of
their ancestors’ work.
Outposts are rarely composed of more than a few
hundred or few thousand colonists at the most. Outposts are either very new colonies that have not have
the requisite time to grow or they are uncolonized
worlds that just happen to have a naval or corporate
base on the surface.
Corporate or military outposts aren’t intended to
be completely self-sufficient. While large outposts are
often forced to raise their own food supplies, replacement personnel, spare parts, and advanced tech must
all be brought in from elsewhere. Such temporary outposts are known to find themselves in sudden distress
when a vital supply ship fails to make its drop or when
some local threat proves more than the staff can handle.
Colonial outposts tend to be better equipped but
with less outside backing. Such natives expect to live
and die on the world, and are more inclined to build

2d6

Type

2

Failed colony

3

Outpost

4-5

Fewer than a million inhabitants

6-8

Several million inhabitants

9-10

Hundreds of millions of inhabitants

11

Billions of inhabitants

12

Alien inhabitants

permanent structures and local improvements. Many
are exiles, malcontents, or others incapable of tolerating the world that sent them forth, and it can make for
a somewhat explosive mix in a young colony. These
pioneers tend to be very friendly towards visiting
starships, as they are often dependent upon free traders and tramp merchants to bring them vital supplies
or news of the sector.
Some “outposts” are really just the stubborn, persistent survivors of a long-failed colonization attempt.
These cultures can survive for centuries, perpetually
culled by the dangers of the world until the survivors
are little more than one more ragged element of the
local ecology.
Fewer than a million inhabitants are often found on
newly-colonized worlds, or those with limited arable
land. This class has the widest range of results, from
societies barely large enough to avoid inbreeding to
minor worlds of several hundred thousand locals struggling against hostile local conditions.
For worlds with a very small population, settlements tend to be clustered close to one another for
mutual support and efficient exploitation of land. The
atmosphere might be something like that of a village-dotted countryside, with too few people to support
large, specialized cities. The major settlement of the
planet is usually built around the spaceport.
Politics on planets with so few people tend to be
very personal in nature. Individual leaders can sometimes address the entire population of a world at a
single meeting, and networks of family, friends, and
employees can dominate the local social life. This small
population combined with limited outside contact can
result in somewhat… unusual societies more strongly
influenced by a leader’s personal quirks than a more
populous planet might be. Some such worlds can grow
decidedly unhealthy in their customs and traditions.
Hundreds of thousands of inhabitants make up
the population of many frontier worlds, usually ones
with adequate supplies of arable land and surface conditions amenable to a human without a vacc suit or filter
mask. This level of population is also usually the most
that a world at TL4 can support using only artificial
hydroponic complexes and sealed agricultural systems,

POPULATION •167
so less hospitable planets rarely have more than this
many inhabitants.
At a hundred thousand citizens or more, city-states
and hub settlements start to form, and some major political divisions might exist beneath the overall planetary government. Regional variations start to become
present as towns and smaller settlements start to assert
their own cultural traits. Young colonies rarely have
much of a framework for resolving these new tensions,
and it’s not uncommon for outsiders to end up as catspaws for varying factions.
A hundred thousand inhabitants is normally
the smallest population that can create spike driveequipped starships. Less populous worlds rarely have
the broad range of specialists and workers necessary
to build such ships, even if they possess the necessary
technical information. Even at this threshold, maintaining any kind of astronautic industry would require
the determined focus of the entire society. Only at populations of a million-plus inhabitants is there enough
of an industrial margin to allow for less determined
construction of spike drive starships.
Millions of inhabitants are found on some of the
more populous frontier worlds, those planets with an
excellent climate and soil for agriculture. These worlds
teem with human life compared to most of their neighbors, and if they have sufficient technological expertise to build spike drives, they probably are among the
significant powers of the sector. The sheer amount
of labor and expertise they can put into their projects
dwarfs the capabilities of less populated worlds.
Some worlds of this type fail to coalesce under a
unified planetary government, however, and turn most
of their attention to intra-planetary quarrels between
different nations or city-states. Full-scale planetary
wars have been known to break out on such worlds,
with some being reduced to burnt-out cinders by some
maltech weapon or by nuclear attacks against regions
stripped of their nuke snuffers.
Billions of inhabitants on a world is a freak occurrence in most sectors, a circumstance dependent on
almost perfect planetary conditions, a First Wave date
of colonization, a very large initial colonial expedition,
and a strong cultural imperative for reproduction.
These worlds have been colonized for almost a thousand years, and have likely gone through substantial
cultural development and change since their founding.
Planets with this many inhabitants tend to come
in two main varieties. The more common is that of
regional hegemon, leveraging its enormous reserves
of labor and scientific personnel to build hundreds or
thousands of starships. Some hegemons might even
have the transport weight and personnel available to
colonize or conquer their less powerful neighbors outright, though most hegemons prefer the safer route of
docile client states rather than outright conquest.
Not all such worlds have the necessary resources
to build starships, even when the labor is cheap and

abundant. These worlds tend to take a different route,
becoming balkanized, conflict-torn planets not unlike
a mid-20th-century Earth. Resource wars are common
and local politics revolve around byzantine feuds and
ancient slights. Technology on such planets tends to be
very uneven; it is limited or nonexistent in fields that
depend on unavailable resources, but the natives often
show remarkable sophistication in making the most of
what they have available.
Alien civilizations are even rarer than massively human-populated planets, but they can be found in some
sectors. On these worlds, any human presence is either
nonexistent or simply a token contingent of traders and
diplomats. The actual number of aliens may range from
a few tens of thousands to teeming worlds of billions.
Alien civilizations appear to be no more immune
to conflict, disaster, and decadence than that of humans,
and most alien worlds are isolated planets. Some sectors were known to be dominated by alien empires before the Scream, but most inhabited worlds found by
colonial surveyors consisted of indigenous, low-tech
sapients who evolved on the world, or else were the
decaying remnants of a former empire that had fallen
apart into isolated colonial worlds.
This fate of growth, expansion, colonization, and
collapse appears to be a very common event in the galaxy. Countless alien ruins and lost deep-space artifacts
indicate that cycles of growth and decay have been
going on for millennia, and there is little way to tell
how many alien empires have swept over what is now
human space before dwindling to rotting worlds and
then empty ruins.

Population Growth

Most worlds have reached an equilibrium state with
their current populations. While there may be some
variation, few worlds are likely to increase much without a drastic change in the local conditions.
For primitive worlds, this limit has been reached
in brutally Malthusian fashion. The locals simply cannot support any substantial increase of their numbers,
and additional population is restricted by widespread
contraceptive use, selective infanticide, or regular
bouts of mass starvation. The only way out of this trap
is through advanced technology that can overcome
the local resource limitations, after which such worlds
might explode in population over a scant few decades.
For more advanced worlds, this limit tends to be
organic to the culture. With sophisticated technology to supply abundant entertainment and sustenance,
there is less importance in having offspring to labor
for the family or nourish its aged members. Individuals become more interested in their own pleasures and
ambitions than in the burdensome work of child-rearing, and population tends to slope downward until
cultural mores reinforce a certain basic minimum of
reproduction. A drastic change in cultural attitudes or
an increase in societal uncertainty can alter this rapidly.

168• TECH LEVEL

TECH LEVEL
The tech level of a world represents not only the level of technological progress and scientific knowledge
available on it, but also the world’s ability to translate
that knowledge into effective production. A world
might still guard texts describing elaborate principles
of petrochemical manipulation, but without oil or
fossil fuels on the planet they have no way to use the
information. It is this kind of resource limitation that
most often keeps a world caught at a low level of tech.
Without bottleneck resources such as petrochemicals
or radioactives, they can’t develop the technology that
would allow them to do without such resources.
Tech level 4 is the baseline level of development for
planets capable of building fusion plants, spike-drive
equipped starships, limited longevity enhancements,
and basic energy weapons. A planet without this level
of development is effectively cut off from interstellar
news and trade without the good offices of far traders,
explorers, or scavenger fleet contacts.
Tech levels are rough approximations, and every
planet is going to have variance within that range. A
decayed colony is unlikely to have forgotten the basics
of human anatomy and practical wound care, but they
may not have the local resources to fashion medical
tools more sophisticated than obsidian scalpels and
herbal poultices. By the same token, a primitive world
might have local resources that are exceptionally useful
in one or two narrow ranges of technology.

Planetary Tech Levels

Tech level 0 represents a world with technologies similar to neolithic-era humanity. Very few worlds collapse
this far without dying out completely, and so a world
this primitive is very rare in human space. The world
is so profoundly devoid of useful resources that the
natives may simply not have anything better to work
with than rocks and native vegetation.
Natives of a world at this tech level might retain
elaborate cultural artifacts and a very sophisticated
society. Existing resources tend to be exploited to the
hilt, with large populations producing massive stone
cities, human-powered engines for irrigation, and vast
displays of foodstuffs and craft work for the ruling class.
Despite this, the lack of metal, domesticated beasts of
burden, and petrochemicals puts a hard stop on the
technological development of most of these worlds.
Responses to far traders and other interstellar
travelers will vary with the local culture. The lack of
quick communications methods tends to result in large
populations breaking up into numerous smaller regional cultures, and the friendly prince of one domain
might neighbor an implacably hostile sage-king. Most
“lostworlders” have a keen appreciation for the benefits
these strangers from the sky can bring them, and will
bargain accordingly.

2d6
2

Type
TL0, neolithic-level technology

3

TL1, medieval technology

4-5

TL2, early Industrial Age tech

6-8

TL4, modern postech

9-10

TL3, tech like that of present-day Earth

11

TL4+, postech with specialties

12

TL5, pretech with surviving infrastructure

Some worlds might retain crisply rational records
of their colonization and downfall. Others might preserve tales of a starry origin in legends and story. A few
might have forgotten their origins entirely, and view
sky-born humans as gods or messengers of the divine.
Such awe rarely lasts very long once the merchants or
pirates who landed make their purposes clear.
Tech level 1 worlds have managed to find and exploit metal deposits and likely have imported or domesticated beasts of burden. Those worlds with easy access
to fossil fuels or a similarly energy-dense substance can
advance to greater things, but a culture trapped at TL1
is unlikely to have access to such helpful resources. A
few worlds have enough usable plant matter or other
combustibles to make steam engines feasible, but those
with very much of such a resource usually make the
leap to the next tech level eventually.
As a consequence, tech level 1 worlds tend to be
caught at much the same general level of development
as their tech level 0 cousins. They may have elaborate
social structures and cultural development, but they
are unable to mechanize without some energy-dense
resource to serve as fuel. The scavenged hulks of their
ancestors’ fusion plants may stand as mute temples to
the achievements of their forebears, but without the
tech necessary to repair and rebuild such edifices the
world is dependent on purely local fuel sources.
Tech level 1 worlds tend to respond to visitors in
much the same way as tech level 0 planets. The ruling
class of these worlds is liable to be able to muster larger
cities, bigger armies, and all the other perquisites that
come from being able to work the available agricultural
land with fewer hands.
Tech level 2 worlds are blessed with the presence of
fossil fuels or a feasibly abundant biofuel source. Internal combustion engines are crude things compared to
the power of a fusion plant, but they can be built with
primitive tools and a basic degree of education. The
mechanization that results from this resource vastly
increases the efficiency of local farming, the speed of
travel, and the productivity of factory workers.
Most tech level 2 worlds are “knockdowns”; planets that once had a much higher degree of sophistication but were recently crippled by disease, disaster,

TECH LEVEL •169
or invasion. The natives tend to be keenly aware of
the glories of former generations, and work fiercely to
redevelop lost techniques and reclaim old knowledge.
Few tech level 2 worlds produce much that’s worth
interstellar trade. Most foodstuffs are too bulky and
cheap to make it worth a captain’s time. Some worlds
have rare ore deposits, but the natives have no reason
to dig them until a merchant makes it worth their while
to set up a whole new industry for export. Some such
worlds barter the relics of their ancestors in exchange
for educational materials or rare resources necessary
for advancing local industry. Others feel forced to trade
native work contracts for dangerous, dirty labor in a
bargain that’s little different from slave trading.
Tech level 3 worlds are those that have developed
to a level much like that of the more advanced nations
of late twentieth-century Earth. The main difference
between tech level 3 worlds and level 4 worlds is the
lack of fusion power or spike drive manufacture.
These worlds come in two major varieties. The
first is a “knockdown” world that formerly had tech
level 4 technologies before some catastrophe or pirate
attack destroyed their knowledge and industrial base.
Some of the wrecked infrastructure might have been
irreplaceable, and the world must struggle to regain its
former level of technological production. Worlds in
this condition tend to have rather small populations
that are susceptible to the loss of a few concentrated
groups of experts.
The second major variety is a world that suffered
a severe disaster shortly after colonization and has
been forced to painstakingly build up their technological base ever since. Some of these worlds date back to
the First Wave of colonization a thousand years ago,
driven into near-neolithic conditions by some outside
pressure before slowly and painfully rebuilding their
technological base through purely indigenous efforts.
These worlds tend to have very large populations if the
world’s climate permits, as they have been colonized for
quite some time.
Simply providing a world with the necessary technical data for advancement doesn’t mean that advancement will be quick or even. Even if a tech level 3 world
has the necessary resources to build tech level 4 devices,
it may take as much as a generation for a world to build
the necessary infrastructure and resource extraction
enterprises. The time may be longer still if the dominant cultures are uneasy with the new technology.
Tech level 4 worlds are the most common in human space, and their technical expertise is the baseline
for modern post-Silence “postech”. These worlds can
create spike drives rated up to drive-3, fusion power plants, grav vehicles, simple energy weapons, and
medicines that extend human life to a hundred years of
vigorous good health. They can manage sophisticated
gengineering on simple life forms, and some tech level
4 worlds have even attempted to improve the genetic
structures of human life itself. These attempts have yet

to produce results without severe drawbacks, but some
such worlds remain populated by altered humanity
designed to cope with local conditions more perfectly
than baseline humans.
Most worlds with regular interstellar contact and
the necessary raw resources eventually gravitate towards this level of technological expertise. It may take
decades, or even centuries in the case of more retrograde worlds, but this tech level is the highest that can
readily be achieved by most planets.
Tech level 4 with specialties is an unusual case of
a normal tech level 4 world that has retained some
pretech industries or has developed their own local
technical expertise beyond baseline postech in certain
specific fields.
Most such specialties are relatively narrow in
scope; grav tech, medicine, hydroponics, force field
generation, or some field of roughly similar breadth.
These specialties are usually either the product of a
few irreplaceable pretech manufactories or the result
of some unique local resource that serves amazingly
well for the purpose at hand. In both cases, the world
will jealously guard the tech, and much local conflict
may relate to control over these resources.
These worlds tend to have substantial amounts of
interstellar trade from neighboring worlds interested
in their tech. The ruling elite of the world can be ostentatious about display of this wealth.
Tech level 5 is the highest tech level that might
merit random placement. A world with this level of
technological expertise has somehow managed to
hold on to the majority of the pre-Scream technology
base, and can produce a wide range of goods that are
unknown on less sophisticated worlds. Miniaturized
fusion plants, drive-6 rated spike drives, exotic grav
weaponry, and even the development of psionics-based
“psitech” is possible on such a world.
Pretech manufacturing was largely dependent on
specially-trained industrial psychics. With the loss of
their unique disciplines in the Scream, most worlds
that retain this level of tech classification were forced
to substitute slower, less precise methods that sharply
curtailed their production efficiency. Barring the profoundly unlikely happenstance of this world’s redevelopment of the lost disciplines, their maximum industrial output is sharply limited. Even on worlds such as
this, most technology is likely mass-produced postech,
with only important goods produced to pretech levels
of quality.
A world with this level of technology is almost
certainly a regional hegemon, one of the most powerful and influential worlds in the sector. Even those
worlds that have no imperial ambitions have enormous
influence simply through the vast superiority of their
starships and military technology.

170• SYSTEM POINTS OF INTEREST

ADDITIONAL SYSTEM POINTS OF INTEREST
The world you’re creating is the most interesting or
important place in this solar system, but it may not be
the only one. If you wish, you can decorate the system
with other points of interest worth PC attention. You
might do this at the same time you roll up the system’s
primary world, or you could wait until it becomes a
significant point in play.

Adding Other Worlds

For simplicity’s sake, it’s often best to just stick with
one inhabited world. The original colonists would have
chosen the most human-habitable planet in the system,
and unless they grew dramatically in the time before
the Scream they wouldn’t have had reason to colonize
less favorable planets before the catastrophe knocked
out their spaceflight capabilities. Other rocks might be
floating in the system, but they’re probably barren and
uninhabited.
If you do decide to add additional inhabited planets
to the system, you can generate them normally, but
you’ll want to ask yourself a few special questions. The
table below offers some ideas for potential answers.
First, what is the origin of the world, and how does
it relate to the primary world in the system? Knowing
where this secondary planet’s inhabitants came from
can often give you answers to a host of other questions.
Second, how do they feel about the primary world?
If you generate three or more worlds, you’ll want to
decide how each of them feels about the other. This
feeling may not necessarily be reciprocal.
Third, what’s the major point of contact between
them and the primary world? If the two are on a friendly basis, this contact might be something that benefits
them both, while a more hostile relationship could
make it a point they’re fighting over or otherwise
struggling to maintain dominance in. In the case of a
mutual threat, it might be something both are facing
with a united front, or it could be the two are struggling
to see who gets thrown to the wolves first.
With these three answers in hand you’ll be able
to flesh out this second planet more easily, adding in
elements from the primary world as needed.

Other Points of Interest

Aside from other inhabited planets, a system can contain a number of other settlements or stations that
could draw PC attention. Most of the time these stations can simply be assumed; a TL4 world is going to
have asteroid mines and refueling stations and listening
posts, and most of these locations have no importance
to the game until the PCs go looking for them.
Other times, however, you’ll want to pre-seed the
system with a few interesting locations. The adjacent
table offers a number of different possibilities to roll
or choose from.
Most of the points are intended to be remote
outposts of the primary world. They might be deepspace research stations, refueling stations on the edge
of the system, bases on isolated gas-giant moons that
have valuable resources, or other far-flung tendrils of
a greater civilization.
Some of these points could be more independent
establishments. A deep-space existence can be made
largely self-sustaining with TL4 engineering, though
the life there is likely primitive and tenuous. With
enough cobbled-together defenses and a lack of anything particularly worth stealing, exile groups, recluses,
and other antisocial sorts can make themselves a private domain that no local planet cares about enough to
commit the resources required to destroy it.
Others among these remote stations become outposts for pirates and other reavers, usually operating
under some deniable cover or protected by enough
defensive installations to dissuade anything short of a
major military assault. The calculus for these robbers
is simple; the effort a planetary navy would have to
make to get rid of them must be more than the cost of
tolerating their depredations.
Few of these anarchic outposts last for very long.
The stronger and more active they become, the more
pressing it is for their victims to take steps to disperse
them. Barring some pirate king both charismatic and
foolhardy, most such outposts are primed for quick
abandonment when a fleet shows up on the sensors.

d8

Origin of the World

Current Relationship

Contact Point

1

Recent colony from the primary world

Confirmed hatred of each other

Trade in vital goods

2

Refuge for exiles from primary

Active cold war between them

Shared religion

3

Founded ages ago by a different group

Old grudges or resentments

Mutual language

4

Founded long before the primary world

Cultural disgust and avoidance

Entertainment content

5

Lost ancient colony of the primary

Polite interchange and trade

Shared research

6

Colony recently torn free of the primary

Cultural admiration for primary

Threat to both of them

7

Long-standing cooperative colony world

Long-standing friendship

Shared elite families

8

Recent interstellar colony from elsewhere Unflinching mutual loyalty

Exploiting shared resource

SYSTEM POINTS OF INTEREST •171
d8
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

A point…
Deep-space station

Asteroid base

Remote moon base

Ancient orbital ruin

Research base

Asteroid belt

Gas giant mine

Refueling station

d10

…occupied by…

d10

…with this situation.

1-2

Dangerously odd transhumans

1-2

Systems breaking down

3-4

Freeze-dried ancient corpses

3-4

Foreign sabotage attempt

5-6

Secretive military observers

5-6

Black market for the elite

7-8

Eccentric oligarch and minions

7-8

Vault for dangerous pretech

9-0

Deranged but brilliant scientist

9-0

Supply base for pirates

1-2

Zealous religious sectarians

1-2

Life support is threatened

3-4

Failed rebels from another world

3-4

Base needs a new asteroid

5-6

Wage-slave corporate miners

5-6

Dug out something nasty

7-8

Independent asteroid prospectors

7-8

Fighting another asteroid

9-0

Pirates masquerading as otherwise

9-0

Hit a priceless vein of ore

1-2

Unlucky corporate researchers

1-2

Something dark has awoken

3-4

Reclusive hermit genius

3-4

Criminals trying to take over

5-6

Remnants of a failed colony

5-6

Moon plague breaking out

7-8

Military listening post

7-8

Desperate for vital supplies

9-0

Lonely overseers and robot miners

9-0

Rich but badly-protected

1-2

Robots of dubious sentience

1-2

Trying to stop it awakening

3-4

Trigger-happy scavengers

3-4

Meddling with strange tech

5-6

Government researchers

5-6

Impending tech calamity

7-8

Military quarantine enforcers

7-8

A terrible secret is unearthed

9-0

Heirs of the original alien builders

9-0

Fighting outside interlopers

1-2

Experiments that have gotten loose

1-2

Perilous research underway

3-4

Scientists from a major local corp

3-4

Hideously immoral research

5-6

Black-ops governmental researchers

5-6

Held hostage by outsiders

7-8

Secret employees of a foreign power

7-8

Science monsters run amok

9-0

Aliens studying the human locals

9-0

Selling black-market tech

1-2

Grizzled belter mine laborers

1-2

Ruptured rock released a peril

3-4

Ancient automated guardian drones

3-4

Foreign spy ships hide there

5-6

Survivors of destroyed asteroid base

5-6

Gold rush for new minerals

7-8

Pirates hiding out among the rocks

7-8

Ancient ruins dot the rocks

9-0

Lonely military patrol base staff

9-0 War between rival rocks

1-2

Miserable gas-miner slaves or serfs

1-2

Things are emerging below

3-4

Strange robots and their overseers

3-4

They need vital supplies

5-6

Scientists studying the alien life

5-6 The workers are in revolt

7-8

Scrappers in the ruined old mine

7-8

9-0

Impoverished separatist group

9-0 Alien remnants were found

1-2

Half-crazed hermit caretaker

1-2

A ship is in severe distress

3-4

Sordid purveyors of decadent fun

3-4

Pirates have taken over

5-6

Extortionate corporate minions

5-6

Has corrupt customs agents

7-8

Religious missionaries to travelers

7-8

Foreign saboteurs are active

9-0

Brainless automated vendors

9-0

Deep-space alien signal

Pirates secretly fuel there

